CHAPTER 3 ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES/FUNCTIONARIES
3.1 Role of Planning Division of Election Commission of India
a) Assessing national availability of Central and State security forces
b) Assessment of national requirements of Central forces
c) Allocation of CAPF to the states
d) Preparing national movement plan of CAPF
e) Ensuring the optimization of state security forces
f) Having a system in place to avail of data regarding force multipliers
g) Coordination with MHA, security agency heads
h) Giving directions to Ministry of Railways
i) Coordinating with Telecom Ministry for webcasting, internet, etc.
j) Issuing directions for force multipliers among others
k) National Plan for deployment
l) Overseeing implementation
3.2 Role and responsibility of Ministry of Home Affairs.
a) To make available CAPF for election as per requisition after assessment of requirement and availability.
b) To make available one-third of the sanctioned CAPF at least one month before the election for confidence building measures
c) To nominate a Force Coordinator for deployment of CAPF
d) To co-ordinate/ensure arrival/induction/departure/de-induction of CAPF in election going States.
e) To make available Helicopters/RAF/NDRF and other logistics to theS tates in case of requirement.
f) To co-ordinate inter-state issues of security required for peaceful conduct of election.
g) To inform States about any intelligence inputs regarding security.
h) Inter border talks with bordering states/countries.
3.3 Role of Ministry of Railways
a) To make available dedicated and time bound rail network for force mobility
b) Forces should inform the office of Force Coordinator and Nodal Officer before start of journey.
c) Movement plan of forces should be worked out by MHA much in advance, based on which timely placement of special trains and splinter coaches can be planned by Railway authorities.
d) Demand for on board meals can also be projected to IRCTC.
e) Train bookings to be done based on destination, deployment and de-boarding stations.
f) The scale of passenger bogies should not be less than 2 sleeper class bogies per Coy, and 1 Bogie for TAC HQ.
g) Minimum 2 - AC III tier coaches per special train must be provided.
h) There should be appropriate coordination between Railways and IRCTC, especially whenever the special trains are delayed for whatever reasons, for supply of meals to the troops at appropriate times and place.
i) Railway stations have limited capacity to handle special trains in a day. Special trains should be diverted to satellite railway stations. These should be clarified before the start of journey.
j) Railways to play a crucial role in planning & monitoring of smooth & timely movement of these special trains.
k) Issue of providing sufficient number of special trains need to be properly planned beforehand especially during de-induction.
3.4 Role of Telecom Ministry
At least six months before Elections, the BSNL and other service providers should be given the responsibility of linking the unlinked Polling stations, so that they get enough time to procure materials, set up infra- structure and coordinate their activities. Last minute instructions bring excuses that they do not have enough funds, manpower, etc. Further, it is also suggested that particularly in very remote areas, or areas with difficult terrain, instead of putting the entire burden on BSNL, o ther Private Players in the field like Reliance, Vodafone, Airtel, JIO etc. should also be made to provide the missing links wherever it is necessary so that to that extent the burden on BSNL could be reduced.
3.5 Role of Ministry of Defence
a) Availability of helicopters for mobility of polling teams and security forces in LWE and in tough terrain.
b) Availability of air ambulances at strategic locations to deal with any eventuality.
3.6 Role of Ministry of Shipping
a) Facilitating mobility of teams and resources in the islands.
3.7 Role of Ministry of Civil aviation
a) Providing helicopters (Pawanhans etc) in remote locations.
b) Providing aircrafts for the mobility of teams on urgent basis.
c) Maintaining the airports, helipads in distant locations.
3.8 Role of Ministry of Surface TransportUpkeep of national highways.
3.9 Role of General Observer
a) To observe all aspects for a fair, free and peaceful election.
b) To observe the preparedness for conducting elections.
c) To observe process of nomination and scrutiny and security arrangements for the same; visit Polling Stations; inspect at random electoral rolls, Polling material and arrangements of polling booths, vulnerable segments; and also do random checking of EVMs.
d) Security arrangements and force deployment plan - Observers to be consulted.
e) Counting Centre is finalized in consultation with Observer
f) Directions of ECI regarding model code of conduct - Compliance to be observed
g) Randomization of polling personnel, counting personnel and Second Randomization of EVM, in the presence of Observer.
h) Role of observers in Force Deployment plan for election duty including that of the CAPF.
The polling station wise and constituency-wise force deployment plan for election duty (including that of the CAPF, the state police as well as the sector plan through Sector Sfficer-SO) shall be vetted by the senior most General/Police Observer jointly of the district concerned. For the purpose, the Observer shall be handed over a draft of the election plan including the force deployment plan immediately on arrival in the state/or as soon as it is prepared. The senior most General/Police Observer shall take review meetings with the DEO/SP/RO on the draft proposals and based on his assessment of the ground realities make necessary changes before finally approving the plan. The plan shall be implemented by the DEO and SP on the ground, as approved by the senior most General/Police Observer, without any deviation. Any subsequent changes that may be necessitated for any reason should be brought to the notice of the senior most General/Police Observer and his/her approval obtained before effecting such change.
3.10 Role of Police Observer The Police observer has a pivotal role in election and responsibility of ensuring that peaceful conditions are maintained in the constituency during election and that citizens exercise their franchise without fear of coercion, intimidation, violence or manipulation. To effectively discharge his duty, the Police Observer should ensure compliance of ECI instructions regarding law and order, district security deployment plan, critical polling stations and vulnerability mapping. Police observers should not venture into areas of poll management, which are entrusted to the General Observer.
3.11 Role of National Force Coordinator The National Force Coordinator is appointed by the MHA and is expected to collect inputs from all the states on day to day basis, by remaining in touch with the State Level Force Coordinator.
3.12 Role and Responsibility of Chief Electoral Officer
a) Review & Assessment of daily Law & Order situation in the state and taking/ ensuring that timely and adequate measures are taken in this regard, by taking into account the specific law and order concerns of the state/ UT in the context of elections.
b) Arranging for inter-border talks with bordering states and doing the needful for Inter-State coordination and sealing of borders.
c) Ensuring that Control-Room, Help-Line, Complaint- Cell, Call-Centre (if required) etc. are functioning at CEO level and at different levels in districts.
d) Ensuring Vulnerability Mapping is completed by DEO in consultation with Police Officers, Sector Officers and field officers as per ECI instructions.
e) Ensuring identification of Critical Polling Stations as per ECI instructions
f) Assessment of availability of State Police Force and requirement of total force for election.
g) Communication of Availability and Requirement of Security Forces (Police/ Para-Military) to ECI & Planning the Deployment of Security Forces (while referring to the deployment plans of the previous elections)
h) Ensuring preparation of District Security Deployment Plan and State Security Deployment Plan as per ECI directions
i) State deployment plan to be prepared by State Police Nodal Officer in consultation with CEO; taking into account the available forces of State Police/SAPF and CAPF which will be made available by the MHA.
j) Ensuring the optimization of state security forces
k) Review Meetings/Video conferencing with DMs/ADGPs/IGPs/ SPs/CPs
l) Obtaining proposals from districts for conferment of Executive Magistrate powers on other officers and getting orders issued from Home Department.
m) Getting notification issued from Home Department under section 28 A of RP Act 1951 for deputation of Police Officers to ECI.
n) Periodical meeting with State Police Nodal Officer, State CAPF Nodal Officer and other officers to review State Security Plan / Force Deployment.
o) Daily review meeting of Law and Order and other security issues with State Police Nodal Officer after announcement of elections.
p) Planning and implementing Force multipliers, such as webcasting, videography, micro-observer, Static Magistrate, etc.
q) Ensuring communication equipment in shadow areas are available and installed through Police Department.
r) Overseeing the preparation of State level plan for movement and deployment.
s) Implementing State Deployment Plan effectively.
t) Formulating randomization plan in consultation with State Police Nodal Officer for state Police personnel and its implementation in all the districts, as per ECI instruction No. 464/INST/2022/EPS dated 15.03.2023.
u) Ensuring availability of Air Ambulance from state Government.
3.13 Role and Responsibility of State Chief Secretary, Home Secretary and DGP
a) Holding inter-border talks with bordering states and doing the needful for InterState coordination and sealing of borders.
b) Appoint individual State Level Nodal Police Officer not below the rank of IG, 4 months before for the announcement of election.
c) Assessment and Communication of Availability and Requirement of Security Forces (Police/ Para-Military) to ECI & Planning the Deployment of Security Forces (while referring to the deployment plans of the previous elections).
d) Every state has a position in the police forces called ADG/IG. Communications who is responsible for procuring and managing the communication system in state police. This officer may be officially appointed as the Nodal Officer Communication for each state and should be responsible for assessing requirements and providing communication systems at each PS and also for coordinating with neighbouring states and the center for procurement, etc. This officer should be appointed as Nodal at least 6-8 months prior to the due date of elections, so that he has enough time for issuing purchase orders wherever necessary.
e) Obtaining proposals for conferment of Executive Magistrate powers on other officers and ensuring conferment of the same.
f) Home department shall send a consolidated report on entire State in format LOR II to the CEO for onward submission to ECI – daily report regularly from announcement of elections till completion of elections.
g) Issue of notification under section 28A of RP Act, 1951 for deputation of police officers to ECI.
h) Assessment of availability / requirement of forces for elections and sending demand to CEO for onward submission to ECI.
i) To send the requisition for CAPF / other State Police to CEO for onward submission to ECI.
j) To mobilize all types of forces within the State for conduct of election.
k) To create a conducive environment for peaceful conduct of election.
l) To make arrangement of other logistics like Bomb disposal squad, Mounted Police, Boats, ammunitions, vehicles, Helicopter, air ambulance at the disposal of CEO.
m) Making all necessary logistic arrangements for security forces.
n) To plan and make available necessary communication equipment.
o) To impart training to all forces for their conduct, safety, role etc. in election
p) CS and DGP to ensure movement/mobilization of State Armed Police Forces for deployment in other states as per directions from MHA.
q) To ensure that budget planning for the requirements of both, the state police and the CAPF, is done much in advance and the requisite amount is disbursed to the districts well in time, and definitely before the arrival of the CAPF in the state.
3.14 Role and Responsibility of State Police Nodal Officer (SPNO) The Commission has issued a separate instruction in details regarding appointment of State Police Nodal Officer(SPNO), roles and responsibilities. On the basis of request initiated by the Chief Electoral Officer to the Chief Secretary/Home Secretary of the State/UT, the Chief Secretary/Home Secretary shall provide a panel of minimum three experienced and competent police officers, working in the State Police Headquarters, within 15 days of such request to the Chief Electoral Officer. Panel shall be accompanied by vigilance clearance and executive record sheet of the police officers. Chief Electoral Officer shall promptly seek the Commission’s concurrence on selection of the police officer for designating as State Police Nodal Officer. Upon receipt of the Commission’s decision on the panel, the Chief Secretary/Home Secretary shall cause to designate such police officer as State Police Nodal Officer (SPNO), in addition to his original work, for three years tenure which is further extendable for another three years after the concurrence of the Commission.
The State/UT Government shall follow following guidelines for preparing and sending panel of police officers:
(i) Police officers who are in the rank of Inspector General of Police and above.
(ii) She/he shall have prior experience of elections in any capacity (including Police Observer) in her/his career.
(iii) She/he should not have been barred by ECI from deployment on election duty.
(iv) She/he should not have been transferred on basis of dereliction of election duty in past.
It shall be ensured that a police officer is designated as SPNO, through the process as above, all the time for election and non-election period to perform duties as directed.
Other Role and Responsibilities of State Police Nodal Officer:
State Police Nodal Officer shall inter alia perform following duties/ tasks in close coordination with the Chief Electoral Officer:
(i) Preparation of State (or UT) Force Deployment Plan and its approval by Committee consisting of Chief Electoral Officer, State Police Nodal Officer and State CAPF Nodal Officer and finally vetted/ modified by the General and Police Observers appointed by the Commission (Detailed procedure can be referred to in the Manual on Force Deployment).
(ii) Prepare multilateral augmentation plan of taking police force/ home guards etc. from the neighboring State/UTs, on mutually acceptable terms, for any deficiency in the State Police Force due to large scale retirements and/or lack of fresh inductions.
(iii) Review and assessment of detailed daily Law & Order situation in the State and ensuring that timely measures are taken in this regard, considering the specific law and order concerns of the State/ UT in the context of elections.
(iv) Coordination with all District SP/ Commissioner of Police on election related issues.
(v) Preparation of training materials and training of all police personnel.
(vi) Taking specific measures for law and order prescribed by the Commission inter alia as follows:
a) Monitoring of past electoral offences
b) Preventive actions and measures
c) Vulnerability mapping and corrective measures to prevent intimidation, influence etc.
d) Execution of non-bailable warrants from competent courts in time bound manner.
e) Special drives for illegal arms, illicit liquor, and contraband
f) Check on illegal transportation and storage of cash and other inducements
g) Any other additional and enhanced measures to maintain and improve law and order.
h) Prepare and provide consolidated reports for the State/UT, in LOR-I and LOR-II formats prescribed by the Commission, to the CEO for review and onward submission to the Commission, from announcement of elections till completion of elections.
(vii) Assessment of requirement of CAPF from the Government of India and convey the requirement to the Chief Electoral Officer with proper justification. Preparation of induction/ de-induction plan of CAPF in consultation with State Level Force Coordinator of Ministry of Home Affairs. Make a detailed plan for accommodation, transport, food/ ration and security of CAPF, while on move or on static duty.
(viii) Preparation of phase-wise movement plan of forces and its monitoring.
(ix) To make contingency plan for rescue, evacuation, hospitalization, air transportation, water transportation etc. by coordinating with different Departments/Agencies.
(x) Creating a database of Helipads/Airfields and creating mechanism for inbound/ outbound frisking.
(xi) Close coordination with bordering States for inter-State border sealing, joint operation etc.
(xii) Preparation of communication plan by augmenting police wireless system for communication shadow zones.
(xiii) Preparing security plan for dispatch centers, receiving centers, training centers, strong rooms, warehouses etc.
(xiv) Preparing special security plans for LWE area or insurgency prone areas or areas with international borders, as applicable.
(xv) Close coordination with police observers
3.15 Role and Responsibility of State Force Coordinator
MHA designates an officer of CAPF, not below the rank of IG as the State Force Coordinator who has to harmonize, liaise and coordinate with all CAPF be it CRPF, BSF, ITBP etc. six-four months in advance:
a) Appointment of Nodal/ Sub-Nodal Officer for each district to facilitate induction of forces
b) Advance planning for accommodation of CAPF in consultation with district administration and its compilation at the State level
c) To ensure reception at de-boarding points along with vehicles in coordination with district authorities
d) Pre-induction training of all CAPF
e) Identification of probable IED prone routes in the State for its circulation to the CAPF
f) Advance planning, preparation of route chart etc. for induction and de- induction of CAPF
g) To set up State Control Room for coordination with various type of CAPF coming in the State
h) Arrange for preparation of communication plan for smooth communication among all stakeholders including State Police, CAPF, SAP, Hospitals and election related officials
i) To ensure optimum utilization of CAPF for confidence building measures
j) Circulation of checklist, do’s and don’ts, election booklets and other relevant materials to all incoming forces
k) To ensure anti-LWE operations, regular demining operations, movement by foot / motorcycle etc. in LWE infested areas
l) To coordinate with State Police Nodal Officer and Chief Electoral Officer for deployment and optimal utilization of CAPF in election
3.16 Role and Responsibility District Election Officer-cum-DM/Superintendent of
Police
A. Role of District Election Officer-cum-District Magistrate.
a) To obtain regular reporting of preventive action, seizures of cash and liquor etc. from Police and obtain similar information from the bordering ranges in other states, review and take corrective measures in consultation with SSP/SP.
b) To compile information from the district and bordering areas and submitting to CEO, DGP, Home Secretary and CS,
c) To ensure preparation of a proper Force deployment plan which is standardized at the state level but still allows flexibility for districts or regions with special concerns in consultation with SSP/SP.
d) To oversee and supervise the logistical needs such as vehicles, accommodation etc. for both the State police as well as CAPFs,
e) To ensure immediate mobilization of additional forces from the reserve in times of emergencies or Law and Order deterioration in certain areas.
B. Role of Superintendent of Police
a) To assist the DM in assessment of needo f force from State HQ, CAPF on the basis of deployment pattern prepared at the State level,
b) To identify and arrange necessary logistical support to be provided to the additional forces,
c) To prepare the detailed deployment plan in consultation with the DM,
d) To ensure close coordination with the bordering districts both within and outside the state.
e) Vulnerability Mapping
C. In general, the DEO, in assistance with the SP, as necessary, does the following:
a) To take preventive actions and enforce MCC:
i) Special drives to be launched from the date of announcement –
1. To compile list of persons indulged in electoral offences during past two elections
2. Updating list of history sheeters, declared absconders, fugitive criminals and their arms deposition in case there are any and license cancellation action as per law and ECI directions.
3. To give effect the service of pending warrants/challans and updating list of pending warrants,
4. To expedite the investigation/prosecution of pending electoral offences
5. Unearthing of illicit liquor factories
6. Seizure of illegal arms and ammunition etc.
ii) Updated constituency wise information on above special drives to be kept ready with DEO on daily basis and to be forwarded to CEO on weekly basis.
iii) Prohibitory orders u/s 144 CrPC banning the carrying of licensed arms - 100% scrutiny of arms licenses and arm shops.
iv) Order relating to use of loudspeakers.
v) Immediately after announcement of election, review of license holders – physical verification of arms in the district
vi) Depositing of arms and ban on issuing of new arms license after announcement of elections – as per ECI direction vii) Strict vigil and thorough checking of vehicles to ensure that no undesirable elements or arms and ammunitions are being transported from outside.
viii) Preventive actions u/s 107/116/109 CrPC against identified source of trouble ix) Sending proposals to the State Government for vesting powers of special executive magistrates and appointment of special executive magistrates.
x) Daily Law and Order report for the district in format prescribed
in format LOR-1 be sent to Home Department and not directly to ECI. The State Nodal Police Officer will compile this report from all the districts and shall present it to CEO.
xi) Expenditure monitoring as per guidelines xii) Taking all action including preventive action for maintaining law and order
b) Securing Elections through Effective Single Window System/ Suvidha:
(i) Though the primary spirit behind establishing this system was to make it a smooth process for the political parties/candidates to obtain permission in a timely manner within the limited campaign period, however, it goes without saying that such a system contributes hugely towards securing elections. If the system is effective then the local police has enough time to prepare its deployment for local rallies and campaigns, etc.
(ii) This should be established not only at District HQ level, but also at AC level, and the contact details of each official at all levels must be put on CEO website.
(iii) Procedure for helicopter landings and the details of the Nodal officers foro btaining permission must also be finalized and placed on CEO website giving details for each district.
c) To Identify Critical Polling Stations
Factors to be taken into account –
(i) PSs having vulnerable pockets and PSs located in identified vulnerable area.
(ii) PSs where polling was more than 90% and where more than 75% of votes have been polled in favour of one candidate in last election.
(iii) PSs where polling is less than 10%
(iv) PSs where Re-poll conducted owing to vitiation of poll process and electoral offences such as booth capturing, during any election for Lok Sabha or State Legislative Assembly in last five years
(v) PSs where any sort of violence took place on poll day leading to lodging of FIR, during any election for Lok Sabha or State Legislative Assembly in last five years.
(vi) PSs with higher than constituency average % of Absentee, Shifted and Dead (ASD) voters (Ref: Constituency Average % of ASD Voters=Total number of ASD Voters in the constituency/ Total number of polling station)
(vii) Information regarding abnormal law and order situation in any particular area.
(viii) Observer will be consulted while finalizing the list of critical PS.
d) To Undertake Various Measures at Critical Polling Stations (PS) for Securing Elections
One or all of the following measures are to be undertaken:
(i) All critical Polling Stations shall have CAPF deployment to safeguard the Polling Stations to the maximum possible extent.
(ii) The list of all such critical Polling Stations shall be given to the Commanding/Assistant Commanding Officers of CAPF so that they can keep a watch on such Polling Stations.
(iii) Deployment of webcasting or videography and any other monitoring system shall be positioned in the Polling Station as a civil measure. Webcasting shall be done in all critical polling stations and all polling station in vulnerable areas or at least in 50% of total polling stations including auxiliary polling stations, whichever is higher.
(iv) Critical events in and around the polling station shall also be videographed.
(v) A Micro Observer may be deployed inside the critical Polling Station, as additional civil measure, to enhance monitoring.
(vi) The Presiding Officer of critical Polling Station shall be specifically briefed to ensure that the EPIC/ approved identification document, if any, are properly verified and reflected in the ‘Remarks’ column of Form 17 A.
e) To undertake Mapping of Vulnerability for Prevention of Intimidation to the Voters
For identification of the areas, Sector officers, should do vulnerability mapping exercise by visiting the area with police officer. Local administrative officers to be consulted before finalizing the list - Candidates’ “Worry List” also to be considered.
(i) Source of such threat / intimidation and names of persons who likely to spearhead such offence of undue influence be identified - Past incidence and current apprehensions.
(ii) Contact points within the habitats / community vulnerability, be identified - Mapping for entire constituency polling station wise in a format (enclosed)
(iii) Preventive measures by DEO and SP and confidence building measures for free and fair poll - Frequent visit at such locations by senior officials and CAPF.
(iv) Regular feedback by district intelligence - DEO / RO shall interact with candidates / political parties.
(v) Details of PS wise vulnerability mapping be given to Observer also on his arrival.
(vi) Action plan by DEO and SP to deal with potential threats and intimidation points - action under 107 / 116 / 151 CRPC, forcing trouble mongers’ appearance in police station, placement of police pickets, visits by officers etc.
(vii) On the day of poll special attention be given - In case some section of voters is conspicuously absent special squad will be sent to ascertain that there is no hindrance.
(viii) At the end of poll SO to submit special report to RO that voters from vulnerable habitats were able to vote or not.
(ix) Polling parties should also be briefed about the vulnerable centres - section in electoral part of the area be marked specially.
(x) CAPF shall be given a list of such vulnerable locations - CAPF shall also make it a point to visit for confidence building measures.
(xi) If ordered by ECI, Observer will make a reading of the Form 17A and the marked copy of the electoral roll used at the PS.
f) To Prepare and Implement District Security Deployment Plan
(i) Full and optimal utilization of CAPFs and SPFs to be ensured.
(ii) District Deployment Plan - To be prepared by DEO and SP jointly and shall be vetted by Senior Most General and Police observers jointly.
(iii) Preparation of local deployment plan based on state plan – containing micro-detailing and based on local situation/ requirements
(iv) To ensure that there is no deviation without express prior approval of Senior Most General/Police Observer.
(v) Observers to be given draft force deployment plan on their arrival.
(vi) CAPF must not be deployed in less than half section strength in critical polling booths in normal areas, whereas in Naxal affected/ Disturbed areas in critical polling booths, the minimum strength should not be less than 1 section
(vii) The plan should have sketch map of each sector and identify vulnerable pockets and critical PSs.
(viii) Security cover to contesting candidates to be provided only as per assessment of threat, and not in routine manner - Observers should be provided with adequate security.
(ix) Three tier cordoning system to be set up in counting centers.
(x) Sealing of inter-state borders/inter district borders, well in advance.
(xi) Deployment of CAPF for guarding strong rooms after the poll.
(xii) Deploying forces at the PSs in the following order of sensitivity - CAPF followed by SAP followed by DAP.
(xiii) To ensure additional measures/force multipliers at critical polling stations.
(xiv) Arranging logistics for the security forces
(xv) Arranging the Training and briefing of 100 % personnel
(xvi) Preparing in advance day to day plans of utilization of central forces for area domination from their date of arrival; giving schedule of all areas to be covered.
(xvii) Ensuring complete implementation of district deployment plans.
g) To Prepare Last 48 Hour’s Management Plan:
(i) The campaign period closes 48 hours before the time of the close of polls.T his period requires heightened force presence and show of force not only to ensure that illegal activities (such as intimidation, bribing, purchasing of votes, etc.) do not take place but also as a very important confidence building measure.
(ii) At this point of time there is joint deployment of both central and state police forces.
(iii) This also requires a great deal of coordination and application of mind on the part of the district authorities to ensure that each PS area is protected, intimidation and influencing of voters does not take place and a level playing field is in place for ensuring a free and fair and peaceful election.
(iv) A separate, standard and very action-oriented “Last 48 hours management Plan” should therefore be in place defining role of crucial election functionaries, role of security forces at various levels; list of dos and don’ts for all stakeholders; the manner of publicizing the plan; and manner of speedy handling of complaints, etc.
(v) This should be jointly prepared by DM and SP for the whole district.
3.17 Role and Responsibilities of the Sub Divisional Officer (Police) and Thana Level Officer (SHO)
A. Maintenance of General Law and Order in the Area
a) Compiling the list of persons under different Thanas, known to have been involved in subversive activities in the past election and ordering preventive action to be taken against them.
b) Getting the lists of known anti-social elements, and criminals updated, thana wise and ordering preventive action against them.
c) Reviewing the status of delivery of warrants issued against absconders and taking steps to expedite the same.
d) Gathering intelligence regarding illegal manufacture/transport of arms, ammunitions and liquor take effective action.
e) Order checking of all arms licenses and recommend cases of suspension of licenses during election periods through SP to the DM.
f) Ensure enforcement of Sn 144 CrPC, when promulgated, during the election period.
g) Coordination with their counterparts in Border States, to effectively check illegal movement of money, arms and liquor etc.
h) Enforcement of laws for protection of property and regulation on loudspeakers etc.
i) Intensive patrolling and checking of public places, like bus stands, Railway Stations, Hotels, lodges, weekly markets etc.
j) Ensure timely reporting of daily law and order report from Thana level to the SP.
B. Specific Poll Related Duties:
(i) Finalization of list of critical polling stations and vulnerable hamlets, in consultation with SDM and submitting it to SP.
(ii) Assessment of security forces to be deployed at:
- Polling stations
- Patrol/mobile duty
- Maintenance of general law and order
(iii) Making logistical arrangements for forces coming from outside the District/ State.
(iv) Establishing a fully equipped control room.
(v) Enforcement of the Model Code of Conduct.
(vi) Along with SDM, briefing all officers about the model code of conduct and electoral offences.
(vii) Training of police personnel and SPOs at Thana level.
(viii) Ensure physical verification of all polling stations and do physical verification of at least 30% polling stations.
(ix) Finalize the routes of polling parties to polling stations, with the SDM and secure them.
(x) Prepare the local level plan for patrolling/fixed Pickets/check points. (xi) Gathering intelligence in LWE/Insurgency/Militancy areas.
(xii) Seek approval from SP for operational plan for LWE/Insurgency/ Militancy areas.
(xiii) Review security arrangements for candidates and take steps to provide security, if required, under intimation to the SP.

3.19 Border Sealing
a) Border meetings are held between states sharing borders, to seal interstate land borders. The state is also expected to take steps to ensure review of present arrangements of sealing of international borders, if any, and of coastal security in states having coastline either in Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal or Indian Ocean.
b) The border meetings have to be initiated by the state Nodal Officer for Law and Order and must be held at two levels - state and district.
c) Each concerned state must give complete cooperation with regard to sealing of border prior to elections.
d) Effective checking at interstate Naka’s must take place for anti-social persons, liquor and illegal arms.
e) CAPF commander may be involved in such interactions.
f) States must make efforts for neutralizing major suppliers of liquor and drugs to election going states. Here it may be pointed out that sometimes the Border States are only transit points, while supply of liquor and drugs may be from a state which does not share a border with the election going states.
g) Control on manufacturing of illegal arms and their supply from bordering states to poll going state.
h) If need be, Border states should also assist in the arrest of absconders/ history sheeters especially who are involved in election related offences in the poll going states.
i) For curbing muscle power, Border States must ensure that they keep a watch on hiring and bringing in men having criminal background from their states to the poll going states.
j) Border States to assist in the arrest of persons wanted in prohibition related offences, if they have sneaked into their state.
k) Border states must ensure availability of dedicated forces in bordering police stations in case of any eventuality and requirement
l) Strict Excise Department vigil in border states at distilleries so that no proliferation take place in poll going state.
m) Use of CCTV coverage at National Highways and State Highways Naka’s.
3.20 Inter-State Coordination
For the purpose of smooth and effective interstate coordination, the following steps need to be taken:
a) The Chief Secretary, Home Secretary, DGP of the bordering states must meet for planning the pre-poll, poll-day and post-poll coordination arrangements, deployment pattern on the bordering areas, preventive action, common concerns such as regulation of inter-state movement of liquor, cash, etc.
b) A nodal officer not below the rank of IG (L & O) from each of the states should be in touch on a daily basis for intelligence-sharing and review of steps such as effectiveness of check-points, preventive actions, L & O incidents of concern etc.
c) The bordering districts should have similar coordination meetings with the DIG, DM, SP of the respective districts meeting for field-level planning and coordination.
d) Nodal Officers should be appointed by the District Administration of the bordering districts for smooth and effective coordination. ADM who is also the Nodal Officer (Law and Order) and Additional SP may be best-suited for the purpose.
CHAPTER 4 PLANNING RESOURCES AND BUDGETING
Force deployment requires sufficient availability of fund and resources in advance. It is incumbent upon the concerned agencies/functionaries to allocate resources and adequate finances to ensure smooth process of deployment of forces. Following provides an outline:
4.1 Coordination with MHA/CAPF/State Administration.
a) MHA must hold advance coordination meetings with State administration, to assess the requirement of Coys as per threat perception in the area of deployment.
b) Representative of Intelligence Agencies must also be involved in deliberation to strike a realistic requirement of Force.
c) After that a coordination meeting to be held by MHA with CAPFs and State administration, to decide actual Force wise Coys required to be deployed based on the availability of the Coys with CAPFs, without compromising their primary role.
4.2 Review of resources/equipment/accommodation availability and budgeting for central forces before election.
The CAPF organizations must plan and assess the following in advance of an impending election:
a) Manpower availability
b) Arms and ammunition
c) Uniform and uniform items in accordance with requirements, weather/ terrain
d) Communication equipment
e) Transportation of the forces
f) Mess facilities for the deployed personnel
g) Basic medicines and equipment
h) BP jackets and any other equipment for forces being deployed in /Militancy/ Insurgency areas as per the scale.
4.3 Assessment and Planning by State Administration The DGP of the state shall initiate well in time the planning and assessment of the budgetary requirements of the security forces – both state and CAPF. The assessment of resources and the provision for budget is the most critical aspect of planning for force deployment by the state. It needs to be carried out in advance of the likely date of poll declaration, and in a thorough and systematic manner. It is the responsibility of the Home Department of the State, CEO and DGP to assess the availability of manpower in the state police and then accordingly, carefully project the requirement of the CAPF to the ECI. They must under no circumstances correspond directly with the MHA in this regard. Simultaneously the budgetary estimation for logistical and other requirements of the security forces needs to be correctly determined, in consultation with all related agencies, including the district level officials.
a) The Department of Home and the DGP must hold a coordination meeting with District administration, at least 4 months in advance, to assess the availability and requirement of local police forces and CAPF Coys as per threat perception in the area of deployment.
b) Representative of Intelligence Agencies of the state and the center, and ADGPs of Armed Units, etc. must also be involved in the deliberations to strike a realistic requirement of Force.
c) After that the state must consult the CEO and the CEO is expected to take inputs from the DEOs before finalizing the demand of the state.
d) The state must then project its demand through the ECI to MHA; including justification of why demand has been made for a specific CAPF.
e) The state must also attend coordination meeting to be held by MHA with CAPFs and State administration, which is the precursor to the decision of actual Force wise Coys required to be deployed, based on the availability of the Coys with CAPFs, without compromising their primary role.
f) The State level Force Coordinator must ensure follow up on all these aspects.
4.4 Review of Manpower/Other Manpower/Other Resources /Equipment/ Transportation/and Budgeting for Forces before Election
The state government is required to review the situation of availability of:
a) arms and ammunition
b) uniform and uniform items
c) communication equipment
d) vehicles as per ECI guidelines
e) well equipped vehicles
f) Proper mapping of PS as per their area and route maps
g) well-equipped control rooms
h) budgeting and making budget available to districts; both for state personnel and CAPF personnel.
i) accommodation/tentage for State Armed Police and CAPF with proper amenities as per ECI latest guidelines
j) Mess for the forces and procurement of ration, etc.
4.5 Logistic Planning
A. Procurement: Procurement of all required material including communication equipment, arms and ammunition, transport, uniform, and related items, etc. In particular, the following needs to be procured or arranged for CAPF and state police:
a) Area specific equipment such as Jammers, Mine protected vehicles for CAPF Coys.
b) Accommodation and other logistic requirement of CAPF Coys such as packed lunch/remuneration for lunch on polling day.
c) Budgetary requirement, if any, to meet out deficiency or shortcomings must be projected to MHA in advance.
B. Maintenance: Systems to be put in place for maintenance of all equipment and facilities such as accommodation/tentage/vehicles, etc. All the procured vehicles and persons shall be in accordance with ECI guidelines and all equipment’s shall be checked well in advance.
C. Transportation: In general, the transportation of CAPF from outside state is to be coordinated by CAPF with Railways Ministry and the State Government concerned. Transportation of CAPF interstate and intrastate for deployment in state is state government’s responsibility; similarly, transportation of state police personnel and SAP for deployment within state, transportation for monitoring MCC, EEM, political campaigns/rallies, and transportation for ensuring general law and order, has to be taken care of by state government. Regarding the deployment of CAPF Coys in the State,
State administration must plan the availability of following: -
a) Adequate accommodation and transportation from the de-boarding Station to designated place of deployment for CAPF Coys
(i) Accommodation
Accommodation for 1 Coy in a Battalion
Sl.
No. Strength Accommodation required Quantity
(Normal
Period) Quantity (Covid Period)
1. For 01 Coy of
CAPF/SAP/IRB Barrack 16x32 (01
Barrack can accommodate 18 Personnel only) 06 10
Room set for Officer with attached basic facility 01 01
Kitchen/Dinning Hall with basic amenities 01 02
Room 16x32 (Kote, office, Store) 03 03
Bathroom 10 15
2. For TAC HQ Room set for officer with attached basic facility 03 03
Barrack 16x32 01 02
Room 16x32 (Kote, Office, Store) 03 03
Kitchen/Dinning Hall with basic amenities 01 02
Bathroom 06 06
Toilet 06 06
3. For Mahila Troops Earmark appropriate resources, such as dedicated toilets for every 5/6 females and provide adequate private changing space.
(ii) Transportation for 1 Coy in a Battalion
Sl.
No. Quantity Quantity
Strength Vehicle required
(Normal Period) (COVID Period)
1. For 01 Coy of CAPF/SAP/IRB Bus (52) Seater 02 10 Mini Bus
Truck for Officers 01 Truck & 01 personal vehicles for his movement 01 Truck & 01 personal vehicles for his movement
Medium Vehicle 01 01
Light Vehicle 01 01
*in case of deployment is less than 01 sec, 03 light vehicles @ 01 per platoon would be additionally required for effective supervision 03 03
2. For TAC HQ Bus (25-Seater) 01 02
Medium Vehicle 01 01
Light Vehicle 03 03
3. For Mahila Troops Maintaining female dignity vehicles to be provided
b) Adequate fuel for above vehicle as these vehicles will remain with the Coys till de-induction.
c) Schedule, manner, and movement of CAPF Coys must not be disclosed in public for their safety purpose.
4.6 Budgeting
a) The DGP of the state shall initiate well in time the planning and assessment of the budgetary requirements of the security forces – both state and CAPF.
b) The DGP must ensure that the budget not only takes care of all logistical and dayto-day requirement aspects for state police and CAPF, but also their honorariums.
c) The DGP shall convey state’s requirements to the Home Secretary well in time for inclusion in the regular budget.
d) Since the timing of all general elections is known, it will be the responsibility of the state government to ensure that the required fund is provided for in the concerned year’s budget.
e) It will be the duty of the state government, that is, of Home Secretary, to provide for the budgetary requirements of the security actors in consultation with the DGP.
f) In case of a bye-election or midterm election, as soon as it is known, the DGP of state shall initiate the process of assessment of the budgetary requirements and convey the same to the Home Secretary for further necessary action as stated above.
g) Finance Secretary of state must ensure sufficient budget to meet all election related needs as well as contingency funds in case of the General Elections/Bye-Elections.
h) The payment of honorarium to CAPF should be done immediately as per the Commission’s instruction issued separately.
CHAPTER 5 VULNERABILITY MAPPING AND CRITICALITY ASSESSMENT
5.1. Vulnerability Mapping
Vulnerability in the context of elections is defined as the susceptibility of any voter or section of voters, to being wrongfully prevented from or influenced upon in relation to the exercise of his right to vote in a free and fair manner, through intimidation including bribing of voters in cash/kind or use of any kind of undue influence or force on the voter.
The exercise of Vulnerability Mapping (VM) in the context of the elections is to be undertaken with the objective of clearly identifying, in advance, such voters or section of voters who are likely to be "vulnerable", the persons or other factors causing such vulnerability and taking adequate corrective action well in advance on the basis of such identification.
5.2. Legal Framework
a) Section 171 B (1) of the Indian Penal Code- Whoever- (i) gives a gratification to any person with the object of inducing him or any other person to exercise any electoral right or of rewarding any person for having exercised any such right; or (ii) accepts either for himself or for any other person any gratification as a reward for exercising any such right or for inducing or attempting to induce any other person to exercise any such right; commits the offence of bribery: provided that a declaration of public policy or a promise of public action shall not be an offence under this section.
b) Section 171C of the Indian Penal Code - Undue influence at elections is an electoral offence under section 171C of the Indian Penal Code. Any voluntary interference or attempt at interfering with the free exercise of any electoral right constitutes the crime of undue influence at an election.
c) Section 123 (2) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 – This section defines, any direct or indirect interference or attempt to interfere on the part of the candidate or his agent, or of any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent with the free exercise of any electoral right, as a corrupt practice.
Additionally, various other related provisions of IPC can be invoked by the enforcement agencies depending upon the offences those create vulnerability.
5.3. Instructions on Vulnerability Mapping
Taking due cognizance of the role being played by the muscle power in elections and taking into account certain prevailing socio-economic realities of electoral politics, the Commission initiated a mechanism called 'Vulnerability Mapping' in 2007. Subsequently, a series of instructions were issued to curb the menace of threat and intimidation at elections by identifying the locations within a polling station area vulnerable for such threat and intimidation. However, in recent times, along with muscle power, money power has also become an important factor unduly influencing voters on account of prevailing socio-economic scenario. Thus, there can be pockets of economically backward sections with low awareness about ethical voting which may be observed keenly during vulnerability Mapping. In this regard, the Commission has issued a consolidated instruction No. 464/L&O/2023/EPS(VM) dated 21.06.2023 on Vulnerability Mapping, Critical Polling Stations and preventive measures.
The tool of VM has been effectively utilized since its inception and depending upon the emerging requirements, it has been modified/adapted from time to time. After over fifteen years of experience of utilizing this tool in all General Elections, Parliamentary and Assembly, the mechanism of VM has now become institutionalized. Drawing from these experiences and learning from the best practices from across the country, the series of instructions issued by the ECI on VM have now been consolidated and augmented further in a systematic framework in this monograph for more effective application in the field.
5.4. Three Stages of Vulnerability Mapping (VM) Exercise In all the Constituencies going to poll, the Vulnerability Mapping (VM) exercise shall be carried out without exception. The VM exercise takes place in three stages:
(i) Identification of the voter’s/voter segments, village/hamlets/ area wise vulnerable to threat or undue influence
(ii) Identification of the persons causing such vulnerability using muscle/ money power
(iii) Initiating preventive measures against the persons responsible for causing vulnerability.
5.5. Parameters of Vulnerability
Every DEO needs to collect input based on present and past records concerning the elements of vulnerability in his/her district/constituency. VM-1(Annexure-I) provides a set of parameters to collect the input on vulnerability. The DEO should collect such information at least six months before the date of poll fixed for the last held General Election from RO/SDM of each Assembly Segment and continue updating it subsequently. After appointment of Sector Officer (four months before the date of poll of last held General election) for the exercise of Vulnerability Mapping, this input needs to be provided to him/her. Suitable training shall be imparted to the Sector officer and Sector Police Officer on their roles, responsibilities and timelines of activities for Vulnerability Mapping.
Other important parameters that are also to be taken into consideration by DEO while carrying out vulnerability mapping exercise and while giving written briefs to Sector Officers include the following:
a) Pre-poll complaints: - Pre-poll complaints may be considered as an important input of Vulnerability Mapping. Complaints are important on many counts. It is a live phenomenon showing depth of political competitiveness much before the poll day. Complaints are not always genuine. However, number and nature of complaints verified true by election machinery may be taken as an indicator of vulnerability. Pre-Poll complaints have usually two dimensions. One relates to MCC including the misuse of money power to bribe voters in cash/kind, and the second relates to political rivalry of diverse nature primarily concerned with maintaining/consolidating/losing of political ground by leaders of political parties. Indeed, the second variety of activity starts taking place much before the Poll Day. Complaints are a manifestation of tremors felt by political parties in the run-up to the elections. Hence, number and nature of complaints need to be considered.
b) Act of political parties: - Number of complaints related to violation of MCC cases, prior to poll, are also important. Experience suggests that political parties are reluctant to take permission of household owners for wall-writing on private property. In rural areas, it is almost taken as granted. The voters may not muster courage to raise voices against the much-organized body called political party, in particular, ruling political party. This creates sense of vulnerability in voters. In this context, the propensity of MCC violations has a strong bearing upon vulnerability of the Polling Station and shall, therefore, be taken into consideration in mapping of vulnerability.
c) Voting percentage in the previous elections: The cases of low/high voter turnout should be examined and analyzed to understand the factors leading to vulnerability, if any. The presence of minorities, scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, other vulnerable sections and domination of anti-social elements should be taken into account for assessing the issue of vulnerability in those areas.
The Sector Officer will use the proforma VM-2 (Annexure-II) for checking and determining vulnerable areas, particularly in non-LWE areas during the visit to the Polling Station(s).
Besides the Sector Officer’s VM reports, the DEO must also ensure the following:
a) Cross-verification of vulnerability report: - There must be some additional mechanism of collecting, cross verifying and collating information at a relatively higher level of the Sub-Divisional Magistrate (SDM). Some more inputs may be added thereon, from SDPOs/other sources/ district intelligence inputs, making vulnerability plan rationalized and realistic. During General Assembly Elections, SDMs shall coordinate with ROs of the assembly constituencies within the sub-divisional jurisdiction.
b) Other avenues for collecting inputs: - The Commission has issued instructions that DEO shall consider the worry lists submitted by political parties/candidates for Vulnerability Mapping, to take a holistic view. The inputs from political parties/candidates, so received may be validated at the SDM level (and not below it) before it goes up to the level of DEO. Similarly, a channel shall be created through call centres/control rooms to gather information from the voters as they are the largest stakeholders in the elections. Inputs form the District intelligence branch of the district police shall also be taken.
In order to ensure authenticity of the Vulnerability reporting, a mechanism of collecting, cross verifying, validating and collating information at a relatively higher administrative/police level shall be ensured.
5.6 Action to be Taken for Vulnerability Mapping
A. Appointment of Suitable Sector Officers and Their Responsibilities
a) Appointment Process:
Depending on the terrain and availability of manpower resources, one Sector Officer (SO), as per directions of the Commission, is to be appointed to supervise 10 to 12 Polling Stations, that can be covered in 1 to 2 hours. The Sector Officers shall be appointed four months before the date of poll of last held General election. Since this is one of the most responsible positions; the best officers are to be identified. If required, Central Govt. officers can also be deployed.
It may be noted that Sector Officers are appointed to look after the VM work related to the specific sections, covered under each of the 10-12 Polling Station, hence this must not be construed as 10-12 Polling Station Locations. After announcement of election schedule till the poll process – Sector Officers shall be designated as Sector Magistrates for the same area, at least 7 days before the poll day. They will be conferred with the powers of Special Executive Magistrates also. The CEO shall take appropriate action in consultation with the State Government to facilitate the conferment of the powers of the Special Executive Magistrate.
b) Pre-Poll Responsibilities:
Responsibilities of Sector Officer

The pre-poll responsibilities of the Sector Officers related to the Vulnerability Mapping include:
i) Initiating VM exercise as per the timeline
ii) Frequent visits (minimum three) for confidence building measures and fine tuning the VM iii) Identification of villages, hamlets, and segments of voters vulnerable to threat and intimidation.
iv) Identification of persons who make it vulnerable - It is not about numbers it is about names - Information to be given in prescribed format to the RO/SDM without having to disclose the source.
v) Accountability for ensuring free access of voters for voting.
vi) Contact points within the vulnerable community with their telephone/ mobile numbers.
vii) SO will act as Sector Magistrate (after notification) and will have to be accompanied by a police officer (Sector Police Officer).
viii) Since SO will act as Sector Magistrate, he will prepare a Sector Management Plan with a sketch map for PSs, list of telephone numbers of PSs and election related officers, police stations, list of responsible persons, list of anti-social elements etc.
ix) Meeting with Labour inspectors and food and supply officers for identification of vulnerable areas.
x) Meeting with heads of educational institution, especially residential institutions.
xi) Interaction with factory/ godown owners.
xii) Meeting with RWA’s/ Gram Pradhan/ Sarpanch for confidence building.
xiii) Sharing information with the beat constable.xiv) Knowledge about geography of the polling station/area.
xv) Identify the distribution of electors in terms of caste, creed, and religion.
xvi) Identification of persons running printing press.
c) Poll Day Responsibilities:
On Poll Day the Sector Officer/Sector Magistrate is expected to perform the following activities apart from his other poll day responsibilities:
i) Frequently check if the vulnerable sections identified earlier, are voting or not
ii) In case of any alarm in this regard he/she has to alert the RO and district administration immediately.
iii) He may also keep a check on vulnerable section with the help of flying squads.
The activities described above are illustrative only. Depending on the local sensitivities, the DEO/RO may add more activities for the purposes of VM.
B. Appointment of Sector Police Officer and Designated Police Officer at Police Station Level
Every Police Station covers a certain area of the Assembly Constituency. For the purpose of VM; SP of the district shall arrange for a policeman who will act as Sector Police officer, to accompany the Sector Officer and jointly conduct the exercise of VM in the given area. The Sector Police officer shall not be below the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector or Head Constable of police.
For tracking the individual trouble mongers and for ensuring that the troublemakers are kept under watch, a specific officer shall be designated at Thana (Police Station) level for ensuring the proper law and order and peaceful poll. He will be called the Designated Police Officer for Vulnerability Mapping. The RO/SDM of each assembly segments shall coordinate with the Sector Officers and these Designated Police Officers.
C. Training of Sector Officers & Designated Police Officers
The Sector Officers and the Designated Police Officers shall be well trained on the following aspects to make them able to carry out their duties smoothly. They shall be trained jointly and each shall be provided with following details during the training: -
a) Electoral roll of each of the PS; with hamlet name etc. to enable them to contact voters of every section in the part.
b) Polling Station Wise Assured Minimum Facilities (AMF)
c) Voter turn-out of AC and of polling stations of that sector (for last 2 general elections)
d) Gender ratio
e) MCC violation cases of that sector (for last 2 general elections)
f) A route map of their area, giving the broad layout and location of polling stations falling in their sector (it could be a sketch map, need not be a scale map) and
g) Other details as per VM-1 (Annexure-I)
Their joint visit programme shall be drawn up and be provided at the time of training. RO & SDPO as well as DEO & SP shall take periodical joint review with these officers to monitor the Vulnerability Mapping (VM) work done by them and review the action taken on points highlighted during their joint visits.
D. Identification of Vulnerable Areas / Segments / Villages / Hamlets
a) The first stage in the exercise of Vulnerability Mapping is frequent visit (minimum three) by the Sector Officer immediately after his appointment. Sector Officer and HC/ ASI/Police Officer shall take visit of the area jointly.
b) The tour programme for them will be decided jointly by the Returning Officer and Dy. Superintendent of Police/SDPO.
c) The Sector Officer must visit every Locality/ Pocket in the area of every Polling Station in his/her Sector, hold widespread discussions with the local people, collect intelligence, and enlist the vulnerable households and families, as well as the persons and factors causing such vulnerability there.
d) While carrying out this exercise, he/she shall take into account the past incidents and current apprehensions.
e) Immediately after the declaration of election by the Commission, the Sector Officer will visit and prepare information in Proforma VM-2 (AnnexureII), and VM-3 (Annexure-III).
f) The local police officer and local civil authorities such as TDO/ Mamlatdar/ Police Inspector etc. shall also be consulted and their inputs be taken in to account before finalizing the list/forms.
g) The format VM-2 (Annexure-II) is only meant as an enabler; and information collected may not be restricted to it. Additional information may be added, if it has a bearing on the vulnerability of the PS.
h) Upon the arrival of the General Observer, Police Observer and Expenditure Observer in the Constituency, the DEO/RO shall hand over the details of polling station-wise Vulnerability Mapping of the relevant Assembly Constituency to the Observers in VM-4 (Annexure-IV) and VM-5
(Annexure-V) and a list of critical polling stations to observers. The final list shall be approved by the Senior most General and Police Observers.
i) The Observer will also visit such locations and interact with the voters and shall constantly monitor the developments.
E. Identification of the Persons Causing such Vulnerability
On the basis of the inputs provided by the DEO in Annexure-I, VM-I, the Sector Officer along with Sector Police Officer shall make field visits at regular intervals and give inputs on Vulnerability Mapping and identify voter’s/voter segments vulnerable to threat or intimidation or undue influence etc. This exercise of identifying the persons responsible for making the voters / villages vulnerable shall be undertaken polling station wise indicating the name of village, hamlet, names of the potential troublemakers, including their address, and so on. This work has to be done by maintaining complete confidentiality of the informers/source, if so desired.
F. Action against the Persons Responsible for Causing Vulnerability
a) The DEO and the Superintendent of Police of the District shall hold a joint review on the subject and shall finalize a focused action plan to deal with the potential threats and intimidation points identified. The action plan may be included, inter-alia, bounding down the identified trouble makers under appropriate section of the law, seizure of illegal arms, preventive detention if required, forcing their appearance in local police stations at reasonable intervals to ensure their good behaviour, placement of police pickets, deposit of licensed arms, placement of police pickets and carrying out confidence building measures. Special efforts should be taken in the last 72 hours to ensure that intimidation or obstruction of electors does not happen on the poll day.
b) It has to be ensured that all such measures are undertaken in absolutely non-partisan manner without fear or favour towards any particular party.
c) Names of contact persons from within the vulnerable groups shall also be identified and their contact numbers / mobile numbers, if any, shall be noted down.
d) For tracking the individual troublemaker and for ensuring that the troublemakers are kept under watch, the Designated Police Officer for Vulnerability Mapping is to be appointed in each Thana, as already mentioned.
e) EPIC snatching from Vulnerable Voters and the incidences of people being induced to deposit their EPIC on payment of money to prevent them from exercising their franchise shall be stopped. The DEOs/SPs/ROs shall closely monitor the situation and promptly take all appropriate action in this regard.
f) SDM/ Dy. SP shall issue warning to the troublemakers that they will be tracked individually. These actions shall be taken in a focused manner.
G. Confidence Building Measures in Identified Vulnerable Areas
a) SO may regularly visit these areas and remain in touch with local people.
b) Focused SVEEP activities and awareness camps to be held in such areas.
c) IT tools like c-VIGIL and Voter Helpline Number 1950 to be popularized and publicized in these areas.
d) Visits by higher officials like DEO, SP and Observers to instil confidence among local people.
e) The DEO/RO shall interact with the candidates and the representatives of the political parties to gather regular feedback.
f) Regular feedback on the subject may also be obtained from the District Intelligence (L.I.B.).
g) Wherever there is a cluster of such vulnerable pockets, the DEO shall arrange for dedicated police teams/squads and locate them at convenient locations in the vicinity, to be pressed into service for action on the day of poll without any loss of time. It shall invariably form part of the District Security Plan.
h) Awareness generation among female and young voters on voting without fear and influence is essential as they tend to be soft targets of intimidation and undue influence, not only from outsiders but also from the family within.
i) Formation of Village Level/ Ward Level Awareness Group (VAGs/WAGs) to mobilise them to gather information of intimidation in area & to create confidence building measures in the area.
j) Targeted ethical voting awareness campaign should be undertaken in these identified vulnerable locations which are suspectable for bribing of voters in cash/kind.
k) Carry out 24 hours’ surveillance by FSTs, SSTs, VVTs.
H. Area Domination Plan for CAPF and Poll Day Deployment
a) The Commanders / Assistant Commanders of the CAPF shall be given a list of such vulnerable locations by the DEO.
b) Wherever CAPF arrives in advance for area domination, special attention shall be given to such locations.
c) Special focus on expenditure sensitive pockets prior to 6-7 days of poll where there is possibility of distribution of cash/kind as bribe among voters.
d) On the day of poll, the Commanders/Assistant Commanders shall make it a point to visit such vulnerable pockets as a confidence building measure.
e) In case they come across any obstruction they shall take note of it and immediately inform any of the electoral officials such as RO/DEO/SP/ Observer/Sector Officer and keep a note of the time of their intimation.
f) Where there was past incident of EVM broken/looted in any polling station(s), CAPFs may be deployed.
I. Monitoring of Vulnerable Areas/Persons on the Day of Poll
Following actions need to be taken to ensure that the vulnerable persons, if any, are able to vote without fear, threat or intimidation:
a) At the time of dispatch of the polling parties from the dispatch centres, the RO shall brief the Presiding Officer concerned about the vulnerable locations within the polling station area.
b) The Sector Officers shall submit a report indicating abnormally low percentage of voter turnout, if any, within any section/sections particularly, with reference to the vulnerable locations to the RO which may be used during the scrutiny etc.
c) On the day(s) of poll, the Sector Magistrates and the mobile forces shall visit at least twice such villages/hamlets/dwelling areas which are identified as vulnerable areas and where there are reports of possible intimidation of the voters. The Sector Magistrates and mobile forces during their visit to these areas will ensure that wherever required, adequate security cover is provided to such vulnerable voters.
d) During the poll, the Observers and other senior officers while visiting the polling station shall pay a special attention to this problem and find out whether any undue influence, intimidation/obstruction is being caused.
e) The police patrolling parties shall keep track of the vulnerable locations and keep the control room informed. Wherever necessary, police pickets shall be established to ensure free and smooth access to all voters to cast their votes without fear.
f) The Commanders/Assistant Commanders of the CAPF shall make it a point to visit such vulnerable pockets as a confidence building measure on the day of polls. In case they come across any obstruction they shall take
note of it and immediately inform any of the electoral officials such as RO/DEO/SP/Observer/Sector Officer and keep a note of the time of their intimation.
g) Deployment of adequate forces shall be done in the vulnerable areas.
J. Role of RO/DEO/OBSERVERS after the Poll
a) The RO/DEO shall take the inputs on mass scale intimidation/ threat/ obstruction, if any, into consideration while submitting their report after the poll.
b) The Observers shall give their full attention to the issue of VM and verify it at every stage. A special mention of it shall be made about the issue in their final report. Apart from this, they shall make an intelligent reading of the Form 17A and the marked copy of the electoral roll used in the polling stations at the time of scrutiny of Form 17A, if ordered by the Commission, after the poll.
K. ACCOUNTABILITY AND CONFIDENTIALITY:
The Commission directs that accountability of various civil and police officials for Vulnerability Mapping and critical polling stations and follow up at every stage shall be clearly defined with reference to each polling station/constituency. Disciplinary action shall be initiated in case of dereliction of duty on part of any civil/police officials in this matter.
It is to be noted that during elections, no press conference of any kind shall be held to furnish any kind of details relating to critical polling stations, vulnerability mapping exercise, vulnerable areas, deployment of security forces etc. Field machinery shall be sensitized in this regard. Any information to media about vulnerability, if required, would be given only by the Commission or by the Chief Electoral Officers of the States/UTs concerned on instructions of the Commission.
L. Reporting Formats
a) Reporting by Sector Officer:
The Sector Officer shall carefully fill the following formats:
i) VM-2 (SO): Polling Station Wise Format for enlisting Vulnerable Localities / Pockets / Voter Segments and list of intimidators by Sector Officer (Annexure II) ii) VM-3 (SO): Summary of Polling Station wise enlisting of Vulnerable Localities / Pockets / Voter Segments and of intimidators by Sector Officer (Annexure III)
These formats are to be necessarily filled for each such locality/ Pocket, while Sector Officer is touring the locality. The Sector Officer must retain copies of the filled in Formats and submit all filled in Formats to the Returning Officer within 3 days of announcement of elections.
In case no such vulnerable hamlet or village is identified Assembly Constituency, the DEO concerned shall obtain a certificate from the field functionaries from the Thana / block level and sub divisional level & from S.P. and finally submit a certificate to the CEO that no such vulnerable village or hamlet or voter segment is available/identified within this district. Such certificates shall be sent within 5 days of announcement of elections.
b) VM Report of the Returning Officer:
The RO of the constituency shall compile all above information and finalize the VM for the entire constituency and make it available to the DEO, within 5 days of announcement of elections after retaining a copy of the same, in the following format:
Format VM-4 (RO): Summary of vulnerability and list of persons causing vulnerability by Returning Officer. (Annexure-IV)
c) VM Report of DEO:
The DEO, on the same lines, must collect the formats VM-4 sent by ROs and prepare and make available VM-5, to the CEO within 7 days of announcement of election. The format prescribed for DEO reporting is:
Format VM-5 (DEO): Report on identification of vulnerability, and action taken at district level. (Annexure-V)
d) VM Report of CEO:
The CEO shall send a consolidated report of the State in the format VM-6 (CEO) to the ECI. The CEO must compile all the district Formats VM-5 of the State into a book and make this available to the Commission along with VM-6 (CEO) within 10 days of announcement of elections.
Format VM-6 (CEO): Report on Vulnerability Mapping of the State (Annexure-VI)
M. Making Law & Order Portal of State Functional
As per the direction of the ECI instruction No.464/INST/2023/EPS dated 08.06.2023 every State is expected to send Law and Order ReportII (LOR-II) on a daily basis to the Commission. These reports are a cumulative gist of:
a) Preventive action taken
b) Seizure reports – illegal arms, liquor, drugs, etc.
c) Vulnerable areas, persons and intimidators and action taken
d) NBW cases
e) Listed bootleggers
f) Externment cases
g) Bad characters
h) Any Media related report
The detailing of each of the cases mentioned above shall be done on the by the State preferably on the law and order portal. This portal is expected to maintain PS- wise details of persons causing vulnerability and the action taken by the administration. This portal shall become functional four months before the date of poll of last election.
5.7 Timelines for Vulnerability Mapping The exercise of Vulnerability mapping shall begin four months in advance so that District Magistrates/Superintendent of Polices are fully aware of the situation at the time the same is reviewed by the Commission. It may be noted that Vulnerability Mapping exercise is a pre-poll exercise, therefore all activities as laid down are to be completed as per schedule.
Sl. No. Activity Time-limit
1. Collection & compilation of basic information on each AC by DEO as per Annexure-I from RO/ SDM of each assembly segments Six months before the date of poll of the last election
2. Updation of basic information by DEO as per Annexure-I Before handing over to Sector Officer
3. Appointment of Sector Officers & Police Sector Officers four months before the date of poll of the last election
4. Appointment of Sector Police Officer at police station level four months before the date of poll of the last election
5. Training of Sector Officers & Sector Police Officers & handling over of basic information of
AC to Sector Officers by DEO Four months before the date of poll of the last election

Sl. No. Activity Time-limit
6. Making Law and Order Portal of State functional by ECI Four months before the date of poll of the last election
7(a) Preliminary identification and submission of VM reports of vulnerable areas/ segments/villages/ hamlets, persons causing such vulnerabilities etc.
in Annexure- II, III Two months before the date of poll of the last election
7(b) Final identification of vulnerable areas/ segments/ villages/hamlets, persons causing such vulnerabilities etc. in Annexure - II, III After the issue of Press Note by the Commission and before the issue of the gazette notification.
8. Submission of all VM reports in formats
(Annexure II, III) to RO. Within 3 days announcement elections of of
9A. Compilation of Sector Officers reports by RO and submission to DEO (Annexure-IV) Within 5 days announcement elections of of
9B. Compilation of VM reports of ROs by DEO & submission to CEO (Annexure-V) Within 7 days announcement elections of of
10 Certificate of NO Vulnerable village/area in Assembly Constituency, by DEO to CEO Within 7 days announcement elections of of
11 Compilation of VM reports of DEOs and submission to ECI in VM 6(CEO) (Annexure-VI) Within 10 days announcement elections of of
12 Completion of preventive/legitimate action against the persons responsible for causing vulnerability At least 7 days before day of poll.
13 Plan and execute joint confidence building visits by DM/SP; SDM/ Dy SP; Tehsildar/PI in areas identified as most vulnerable. Within 2 weeks prior to poll day
14 Pre-poll area domination by CAPF At least 3-5 days before poll day.
15 Strict vigil and monitoring of vulnerable areas/ persons by Observers, DEO/RO, SO, Police On the Poll Day
5.8 Criticality Assessment
Undue influence in elections is an electoral offence under section 171C of the IPC. Any voluntary interference or attempt at interfering with the free exercise of any electoral rightc onstitutes the crime of undue influence in an election. Section 123 (2) of the R.P Act 1951d efines, any direct or indirect interference or attempt to interfere on the part of the candidate or his agent, or of any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent with the free exercise of any electoral right, as a corrupt practice.
Taking due cognizance of the role of muscle power in the elections and taking into account of certain prevailing socio-economic realities of the electoral politics, the Commission has issued instructions to curb the menace of threat and intimidation of voters especially the weaker sections of society at elections by identifying critical Polling Stations. Special measures are required to be taken at these polling booths so as to ensure that everybody is allowed to cast their vote without fear or threat.
A. Parameters for identification of Critical Polling Stations
In order to identify the critical polling stations, the Commission has prescribed certain objective criteria to be followed by the DEO/RO, which are as under: (i) PSs having vulnerable pockets and PSs located in identified vulnerable area.
(ii) PSs where polling was more than 90% and where more than 75% of votes have been polled in favour of one candidate in last election.
(iii) PSs where polling is less than 10%
(iv) PSs where Re-poll conducted owing to vitiation of poll process and electoral offences such as booth capturing, during any election for Lok Sabha or State Legislative Assembly in last five years
(v) PSs where any sort of violence took place on poll day leading to lodging of FIR, during any election for Lok Sabha or State Legislative Assembly in last five years.
(vi) PSs with higher than constituency average % of Absentee, Shifted and Dead (ASD) voters (Ref: Constituency Average % of ASD Voters=Total number of ASD Voters in the constituency/ Total number of polling station)
(vii) Information regarding abnormal law and order situation in any particular area.
B. Measures to be Taken for Critical Polling Stations
The DEO/RO shall factor all the above inputs while identifying the critical Polling Stations for additional measures. The ECI observer shall be consulted while finalizing the list of critical polling stations as per the above instructions.
With reference to polling stations identified as critical polling stations on account of the indicators listed above one or all of the following measures shall be put in place: -
(i) All critical Polling Stations shall have CAPF deployment to safeguard the Polling Stations to the maximum possible extent.
(ii) The list of all such critical Polling Stations shall be given to the Commanding/Assistant Commanding Officers of CAPF so that they can keep a watch on such Polling Stations.
(iii) Deployment of webcasting or videography and any other monitoring system shall be positioned in the Polling Station as a civil measure. Webcasting shall be done in all critical polling stations and all polling Station in vulnerable areas or at least in 50% of total polling stations including auxiliary polling stations, whichever is higher.
(iv) Critical events in and around the polling station shall also be videographed.
(v) A Micro Observer may be deployed inside the critical Polling Station, as additional civil measure, to enhance monitoring.
(vi) The Presiding Officer of critical Polling Station shall be specifically briefed to ensure that the EPIC/ approved identification document, if any, are properly verified and reflected in the ‘Remarks’ column of Form 17 A.
[The details of non-CAPF measures have been described in the manual “Force Multiplier and non-CAPF Measures”] The Commission’s direction regarding the incidences of EPICs being snatched away from vulnerable voters and the incidences of people being induced to deposit their EPIC on payment of money in order to prevent them from exercising their franchise are to be monitored. The Commission has directed that a strict vigil shall be kept about such development and DEOs/SPs/ROs shall closely monitor the situation and in case of any such incident happens, the snatched/taken away EPICs be recovered and those EPICs be restored to the actual voter. Delivering Voter information slips to all the vulnerable voters should also be ensured. Special caution should be taken by RO that delivery of Voter information slips must be handed over to voter himself. The Observers shall give their full attention to this issue and verify at every stage (before poll/ on poll day) and submit reports to the Commission from time to time. A special mention shall be made about this in their final report. Apart from this they should make an intelligent reading of the Form 17A and the marked copy of the electoral roll used in the polling stations at the time of Form 17A scrutiny ordered, if any, by the Commission after the poll.
CHAPTER 6 FORCE MULTIPLIERS AND NON-CAPF MEASURES
Force multiplication/multiplier is a term commonly used in armed forces parlance and refers to those attributes which when applied to or utilized by a given force, makes its impact much larger and more effective. Latest and effective equipment, training, good transport logistics, etc. are considered force multipliers.
During elections, the Central Police Forces (CAPF) are considered the main force multipliers due to their perceived neutrality, superior training and discipline and experience of dealing with challenging situations. With an estimated voter population touching 1.51 billion in 2030, the number of polling stations in the country is likely to cross 12 lakhs as compared to the current number of 11 lakhs. Given the fact that the manpower available with CAPF is likely to remain more or less constant, it is essential that this limitation is appreciated and a number of non-CAPF measures are delineated for becoming effective force multipliers.
Based on the past experiences, advancement in technology, and recommendations of the internal deliberations, non-CAPF measures are now classified in the following 10 categories: -
1. Technology – Use of Technology such as Webcasting, CCTV, Still Cameras, Videography, SMS monitoring, c-Vigil App etc. for monitoring and complaint redressal.
2. Media including social media - for supporting free, fair, independent, inclusive, informed, ethical, participative, vigilante, event-free elections.
3. Manpower Management - Advance auditing and timely deployment of the manpower requirements for the various electoral tasks.
4. Capacity Building of Manpower – standardized, high quality and need-based training.
5. Manpower Deployment Planning – Advanced and effective Deployment Planning in complete confidentiality and with elements of surprise (such as randomization).
6. Motivation and Welfare of Manpower Deployed (including Police Force) - For high moral and maximum work satisfaction.
7. Communication Plan – Robust and thoroughly tested communication plan (such as SAT phones, wireless etc.).
8. Route Planning – Advance planning and arrangements for efficient use of transport and effective route planning for smooth and hassle-free mobility during elections.
9. Complaint Management System - Active Call Centres and Control Room dealing with complaints within stipulated timeframe.
10. Inter-State Cluster for Sharing of State Police Manpower - For sharing of State police manpower in a pre-determined manner.
There is a separate manual and instruction on Force Multiplier and Non-CAPF measures. For details of Non-CAPF measures, the concerned manual and instruction No.464/INST/2022/EPS dated 19.06.2023 can be referred to.
CHAPTER 7 PLANNING FOR FORCE DEPLOYMENT
Planning is the foundation of effective and efficient force deployment during electoral process. The Commission emphasizes the initiation of it much before the announcement of election dates.
7.1 Pre-poll Planning (before announcement of polls)
A. Appointment of Nodal officers and Demarcating Areas of Responsibility.
Following officers should be designated as nodal officers, at least 6-8 months prior to the expected announcement of elections:
a) National Force Coordinator as a Nodal Officer for CAPF/SAP/IRB coordination: An IG of CAPF will be appointed by MHA and will be responsible for assessment, allocation and movement of all CAPF/SAP.
b) State Police Nodal Officer – An IG level officer should be designated as State Police Nodal Officer. He shall be overall responsible for ensuring that law and order in the state is maintained so that elections can be held in a conducive atmosphere. He shall have to closely monitor preventive action being taken by the districts and to guide them where necessary. He shall be the one point of reporting all incidents that have a bearing on polls to the ECI. He must ensure that law and order portal of the state is set up well before announcement of elections, regular monitoring of the information uploaded on the portal. He shall also arrange for daily reporting to ECI, the designated LOR-II formats. He is also responsible for preparing the State Force Deployment Plan. He will also be responsible for overall resource management and Resource Planning.
c) State Force Coordinator- IG /ADG level officer from the state police to coordinate with ECI/MHA and CAPF allotted to the state, who will prepare the movement plan of the CAPF for its local deployment in districts and for state police forces in case they are to be moved from one district to another. He will also oversee the preparation and implementation of the Local Area Domination Plan by the districts.
d) Nodal officer (Election Expenditure) for State Police: Home Department of the State/UT may designate a police officer in the rank of IG or above as Nodal Officer (Election Expenditure) to assist SPNO in matters related to seizure of cash, liquor, contraband and other inducements where the State Police is mandated to take action as per the directives of the Commission.
Nodal Officer EE, shall work in tandem and coordination, under overall guidance of SPNO, with Nodal Officers of other Enforcement agencies.
However, such arrangement is optional and State/UT may choose to designate SPNO as Nodal officer (EE) for state police. Concurrence or approval of the Commission is not required to designate a police Officer as Nodal for Election Expenditure.
e) Nodal Officer Training –ADG Training in the state may be designated as nodal officer for providing training to state security forces, to be deployed during elections and for CAPF forces coming from outside the State. C/he shall prepare the State Training Plan for security forces including the CAPF.
B. Identification of forces
The CAPF broadly consist of following forces under the control of MHA.
a) Assam Rifles (AR)
b) Border Security Force (BSF)
c) Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
d) Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
e) Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
f) National Security Guard (NSG)
g) Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)
h) Any other forces detailed by MHA.
C. Processes involved in assessment of required Forces
The assessment of requirement of forces is the most crucial ingredient for scheduling. It basically requires planning with an acute sense of understanding of ground realities and capability to weave in all aspects into a schedule that balances all concerns of all the stakeholders – states, political parties, Commission, voters. The announcement of the schedule itself is the first Confidence Building Measure by the Commission.
a) To gather such detailed inputs, the Commission first of all holds a meeting with the Chief Secretaries, Directors General of Police, Home Secretaries, Chief Electoral Officers and Police Nodal Officers of all States and UTs.
b) This meeting is held to assess the overall law and order situation, ascertain State/UT specific areas of concern, deliberate on the quantum of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) required in each State/UT and to review the overall preparedness of the election machinery.
c) At the State level detailed discussions is held with the Police authorities, the telecom authorities including the private service providers to assess
the Law & Order situation, identification of the mobile shadow zone areas. One major concern for the ECI and for the states is the deployment of Central and State Police Forces to ensure peaceful, free, fair election with fearless participation of electors, in the vulnerable areas/ pockets. This is also to be taken into account.
d) The Election Commission has issued detailed guidelines for working out the requirement of forces for any election. It mainly consists of duties of static surveillance team, flying squad, and for area domination during the pre-poll period, security of polling stations and zonal party during the poll period and safety of polled machine in after poll period. The identification of the forces is done jointly by the MHA and the ECI.
D. Pooling of State Police Forces (SAPF) for Non-LWE States
The use of Central Police Force in conduct of election is now almost a regular feature in most of the States. Political parties across the board demand CAPF and its deputation for conduct of free, fair and peaceful election. The demand of deputation of CAPF is largely driven by the perception that CAPF coming from other places do not have any local linkage. This demand has generated an acute shortage of CAPF in conduct of elections. In this context, State Police of other States are mobilized for its deputation to the election going State as CAPF. InterState sharing of police forces will reduce the burden of CAPF on one hand and it will lead to more credible election on the other hand.
a) Identification of Zone-wise clusters for inter-state sharing of State Armed Police Force (SAPF)/ Home Guards
This arrangement is being done in Assembly elections of various States. Now it is imperative to form Zone-wise clusters for inter-state sharing of State Police Force in case of Assembly elections/Lok Sabha Elections.
These zonal clusters can be classified into the following five zones:
1 East Zone Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Sikkim, Chhattisgarh
2 North-East Zone Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh
3 West Zone Rajasthan, Gujarat, Daman & Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Goa
4 North Zone Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Delhi and Chandigarh
5 South Zone Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamilnadu, Pudducherry, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep
Every zone will prepare a broad outline regarding creation of zonal reserve of State Police Force considering the strength of police force in each State and the number of State Police Force, which can be spared for election in other State of the Zone. In case of simultaneous election, more State Police Force may be required to be mobilized and exchanged for conduct of election and such numbers should also be mutually agreed upon.
These State Police Forces in general will be deployed in non-LWE/ Militancy/Insurgency areas only. Specialized State Police Force, which has been trained for anti-naxal operations may be deployed in LWE/Militancy/ Insurgency area of other state only after specific permission from ECI and with due caution. Inter-state sharing of State Police Force will also require comprehensive pre-induction training by the state Police Nodal Officer/ State Police Nodal Officer (CAPF) regarding their role in election, local custom, briefing about the areas going to poll and other SOPs.
b) Joint Coordination Committees for Central Armed Police Force (CAPF)/ State Armed Police Forces (SAPF):
A Joint Coordination Committee comprising CEO/Additional CEO, State Police Nodal Officer, State CAPF coordinator, State level Force coordinator appointed by MHA is required to be formed for co-ordination, communication, logistics, operations, and welfare related issues. They will meet periodically and work out a detailed plan for the mobilization, induction, deployment, operation, and de-induction of Central Armed Police Force (CAPF)/ State Armed Police Forces (SAPF). A Central Communication & Coordination Centre will be formed with its headquarters in the capital city of the State/UT going for elections with 24x7 communication system for resolving any issue.
E. Non-LWE constituencies profiling
a) Security profiling of Assembly Constituencies/ Polling Stations
(DEO/SP)
This should be done on the basis of following parameters and inputs:
(i) Law and order assessment and intelligence inputs.
(ii) Number of vulnerable villages/hamlets or settlements.
(iii) Assessment of criticality, based on previous election experience and the current ground situation.
(iv) Assessment of ease of communication at the polling station (communication shadow area).
(v) Any other specific input
b) Infrastructure profiling of Assembly Constituencies/ Polling Stations
(DEO/SP)
(i) Topography of the area- Riverine, hilly, forested, desert etc.
(ii) Physical infrastructure- buildings, route to be traversed by polling party.
F. LWE/Insurgency/Militancy constituencies profiling
a) Security profiling
Security profiling, based on the categorization of LWE areas within the district, broadly as most vulnerable/vulnerable and affected by LWE (terminologies may vary from state to state)
b) Infrastructure profiling
(i) Infrastructure profiling-As in non LWE areas
(ii) Topography of the area- Riverine, hilly, forested, desert etc.
(iii) Physical infrastructure- Road network, bridges, buildings (logistics) etc.
G. Assessment of Forces and Preliminary Force Deployment Plan
a) Availability of District police forces and other department personnel, who can be deployed as special police officers should be ascertained.
b) Based on the profiling of the polling stations in the District, a preliminary force deployment plan for the District should be prepared, indicating the number of forces of the District (police and other than police) to be used as well as the numbers of CAPF proposed to be deployed.
c) This preliminary force deployment plan would necessarily be a dynamic plan, subject to changes on account of factors like actual availability of CAPF, unexpected Law and order/LWE incidents and fielding of highprofile/important candidates for elections, Covid-19 situations etc.
d) At the State Level, this Plan is to be prepared by the SPNO/ State Force Coordinator, separately for LWE and Non LWE areas/constituencies, in consultation with the CEO. At the District Level, this Plan is prepared by the DM and SP, separately for LWE and non LWE areas (if any).
H. Creation of State Level Coordination Group
A state level coordination group should be created by the CEO, comprising of:
a) Additional/Joint CEO, nominated by CEO.
b) All Nodal police officers.
c) State level officers from Panchayat and rural Development department, Urban Development department, School education Department, Forest Department and Transport Department. (the list of departments is not exhaustive and may be added to depending upon state specific requirements) This group shall be responsible for:
1. Assessment of personnel in their department, who can be used as Special police officers in elections.
2. Assessment of security related resources in their departments, which is required for support during the election period.
3. Pooling of human and material resources, including Force Multipliers, effective liaison etc.
I. Force Deployment Matrix:
FINAL FORCE DEPLOYMENT PLAN
State District AC PS
Broad institutional framework for the force deployment is as follows: CEO/State Force
•
•
Most critical Critical Vulnerable • Criticality
- Physical infrastructure(Including common set-up)
- Topography
- Candidate profile (after filing of nomination)
7.2 Poll Planning (from announcement of poll till its completion) A. Important points to be considered in force deployment:
a) Determination of general principles for deployment of forces in election with prior consultation with DEO-cum-DM, CP, SSP/SP, State Police Nodal Officer, DGP, Home Secretary and ECI officials
b) Preparation of State / District Security Deployment Plan after assessment of availability and requirement of forces
c) Requisition of CAPF/Other Forces from MHA and ECI
d) Arrival of one third Coys of allotted CAPF - one month prior to the day of poll for area domination and remaining 2/3 Coys of allotted CAPF will be available 7 days prior to poll day.
e) Regular State level co-ordination meeting with State Police Nodal Officer, State Nodal Officer, CAPF in CEO Office
f) Deputation of Rapid Action Force for areas prone to communal tension
g) Inter-State border sealing - meeting with bordering States / districts of bordering Countries.
h) Planning for deployment considering the movement of forces in various phases, sanitization of LWE area, festivals/communal disturbance
i) Plotting of Polling Stations in Riverine areas and in Hilly / Forest areas, if any.
j) Requisition of NDRF / SDRF, Mounted Police, Bomb disposal squads
k) Earmarking of CAPF for expenditure monitoring
l) Pre- induction training of all forces
m) Requisition of Helicopter / Air Ambulance / Sat phones
n) Strategic plan for communication shadow zone area – regular meeting with Telecom Department, BSNL and other TSPs.
o) Taking photographs of deployed CAPF in front of Polling Station
p) Visit of CAPF in vulnerable locations
q) Earmarking type of CAPF for various kinds of duties like CISF or RPF for Strong Room duty, BSF or ITBP for highly infested LWE area
r) Daily / Weekly monitoring of law and order - mainly execution of NBW (more than 6 months), Raid/seizure of illicit liquor, deposition of arms, collection of fine for violation of MV Act, execution of bond under CrPC against trouble makers / anti-social elements, order against habitual offenders for externment / preventive detention etc.
s) Issuance of direction for uniform distribution of food/dry ration/cash as the case may be throughout the State
t) Dedicated vehicle to CAPF for the entire election period in the State. B. Randomization of State Police Personnel:
Randomization of State Police personnel at the Polling Station on the day of poll may be done in the following manner: -
a) Police Constables/ Home Guards coming from outside the district can be deployed without randomization.
b) Lists of constables/ Home Guards of a district should preferably be matched with computerized database (e.g. HRMS) of Home Dept, if maintained, to ensure integrity of lists.
c) In case of Constables/ Home Guards of the same District, it would be ensured that they shall be deployed in the Polling Stations falling outside the area of the Police Station where they are presently posted.
d) As far as practicable, randomization should be done in such a manner that they are posted in the same parliamentary Constituency where they are enrolled as voters to allow them to exercise their franchise through EDC.
C. Generic Parameters of Force Deployment
The quantum of force needed for the conduct of elections depends on the nature of elections. Therefore, the scale of deployment varies for bye-elections for Assembly Constituencies (AC) or Parliamentary Constituencies (PC), State Assembly General Elections and Lok Sabha General Elections. The poll going States must work out State Force Deployment Plan based on the existing law & order situation, phases of elections, vulnerability mapping, criticality assessment and availability of forces. These guidelines are suggestive in nature and the actual scale of deployment shall be finalized by the Chief Electoral Officer and the State Police Nodal Officer (SPNO) as per ECI instructions.
A minimum of 1 Un-Armed Police Constable and 1 Home Guard / Special Police Officer (SPO) shall be deployed at each of the Polling Station Locations (PSL) with 1 Polling Station. A minimum of an additional Armed Police Constable shall be deployed, if the Polling Station is categorized as Critical Polling Station. The scale of deployment shall be increased in case of Polling Station Locations having more than one Polling Stations.
a) Deployment of CAPF/SAP for Non-LWE/Militancy/Insurgency areas:
(i) Critical Polling Station Location (PSL) shall be covered by a minimum of ½ Section of CAPF as far as possible.
(ii) ½ Section of CAPF shall preferably be deployed with Flying Squads (FS), Static Surveillance Teams (SST) and QRTs
(iii) 1-Platoon of CAPF on 24x7 basis (1-Platoon in 3-shifts) shall be deployed at all the Polled EVM Strong Rooms and Counting Centres.
b) Deployment of SAP/IRB in Non-LWE areas:
(i) The State/UT going to polls may make use of SAP/IRB for meeting the demands for Armed Police for deployment at Critical Polling Station Locations (PSLs) not covered by CAPF in addition to Unarmed Police and Home Guard/ Special Police Officer. The quantum of SAP/ IRB to be deployed may be decided by the State Police Nodal Officer (SPNO) and the Chief Electoral Officer (CEO) based on the criticality assessment and availability of resources. The scale of deployment shall be increased in case of Polling Station Locations having more than one Polling Stations.
(ii) The personnel from SAP/IRB may be deployed for SSTs, FSs, InterState border check posts, QRTs, PSO to observers etc.
c) Force Deployment in LWE areas:
(i) Deployment of CAPF:
1. Critical Polling Station Location (PSL) shall be covered by a minimum of 1 Section of CAPF as far as possible. The scale of deployment may be increased in case of Polling Station Locations having more than one Polling Stations.
2. 1 Section of CAPF shall preferably be deployed with Flying Squads (FS), Static Surveillance Teams (SST) and QRTs
3. 1 Coy of CAPF on 24x7 basis (1-Coy in 3-shifts) shall be deployed at all the Polled EVM Strong Rooms and Counting Centers
(ii) Deployment of SAP/IRB:
1. The police leadership State/UT going to polls may make use of SAP/IRB for meeting the demands for Armed Police for deployment at Critical Polling Station Locations (PSLs) not covered by CAPF in addition to Unarmed Police and Home Guard/ Special Police Officer. The quantum of SAP/ IRB to
be deployed may be decided by the State Police Nodal Officer (SPNO) and the Chief Electoral Officer (CEO) based on the criticality assessment and availability of resources. The scale of deployment shall be increased in case of Polling Stations having more than one Polling Stations.
2. The personnel from SAP/IRB may be deployed for SSTs, FSs, inter-state border check posts, inter-district check posts, QRTs, PSO to observers etc.
D. Deployment plan to include Arrangements for Counting
The final deployment plan for election duty shall also include:
a) Deployment plan for guarding of EVM strong rooms by CAPF, from the time of collection of polled EVMs in the strong room, till the completion of counting. Deployment of CAPF for inner most cardon at the counting centre
b) Deployment plan for the state police at the counting centre for:
(i) Prevent entry of unauthorized persons inside the counting centres
(ii) Stationing of frisking personnel, including women police personnel/ Home guards.
(iii) Stationing of executive magistrates, to control crowd movement at the counting centres.
(iv) Regulation of victory processions after announcement of results.
E. To recapitulate, the process for preparing state level and district level deployment plans consists of the following steps:
a) Assessment of local situation and requirements by the district machinery
b) Interaction of the CEO office and Nodal officers’ law and order with the district machinery to assess requirements
c) Collecting of data related to criticality/vulnerability, availability of resources, communication shadow areas, low voter turnout areas, low female voter turnout areas, trouble spots, manpower availability, etc. from districts
d) Preparing database of above at state level
e) Preparing an indicative deployment plan at state level showing tentative allocation of state police forces
f) Holding discussions with district machinery on the basis of the indicative plan
g) Firming up state deployment plan and issuing indicative plan for district level clearly spelling out the minimum deployment for static, mobile, police station and reserve deployments
h) Allocating central forces (once the same is intimated by the ECI) on the basis of the above discussions
i) The plan is prepared in such a manner that:
(i) No central force personnel are kept in reserve
(ii) At least 80 % of the State Police forces are utilized
(iii) Maximum central forces personnel are deployed for static duties at Polling stations
(iv) Critical PS are covered by central forces
(v) Home Guards and related forces are utilized for the purpose of maintenance of queues at PS, while state police personnel are deployed for maintenance of law and order.
F. An indicative format for the purpose of preparing the State & District Level Deployment Plan (non LWE) is attached as Tables 1A, 1B, 2A and 2B (Annexure-IX to XII) for reference.
Annexure-IX Table 1A Polling Station Location Details
Annexure-X Table 1B Strength of State Police Force (rank wise)
Annexure-XI Table 2A District Security Deployment Plan
Annexure-XII Table 2B State Security Deployment Plan
G. Stages of Force Deployment
a) Pre-poll-day deployment
(i) CAPF
1) CAPF arrives in advance to carry out flag marches for area domination, point patrolling and other confidence building measures till 2 days before the polling day.
2) Coordinate with local police under the guidance of DEO/SP, provided with area-wise list of anti-social elements, list of vulnerable hamlets and critical polling stations.
3) Necessary teams are constituted to take out flag marches, point patrolling, sanitation particularly of LWE areas and other confidence building activities including interaction with local population of vulnerable hamlets (mostly on foot).
4) May also be used for additional deployment on check posts for preventing illegal movement of cash, liquor, drugs, and unaccounted election material by political parties/candidates.
(ii) State Police
1) Area domination (in case of inadequate CAPF) 2) Guarding of EVM Strong Rooms and EVM warehouses 3) Vulnerability Mapping and take preventive measures.
4) Implementation of Model Code of Conduct
5) Establish check-posts and prevent illegal movement of cash, liquor, drugs, anti-social elements, etc.
6) Responsible for maintenance of the general law and order in the catchment area of the polling stations and generally in the constituency/ district/ state
7) Implement Election Expenditure Monitoring Guidelines
8) Handle VIP movement
9) Implement Deployment Plan
10) Provide logistical support to CAPF
b) Poll day and post poll – deployment
(i) CAPF
1. Guarding the polling stations, EVM-VVPAT strong room, escorting duty of polled EVMs, poll materials including EVM-VVPAT, poll personnel and the poll process.
2. Static guarding of trouble spots
3. Patrolling duty on assigned routes covering a fixed cluster of polling stations;
4. Patrolling duty as ‘flying squads’ in a defined area with surprise element;
5. Strong room security after poll
(ii) State Police
1. Maintenance of the general law and order in the catchment area of
the polling stations and inside and outside of the polling premises (as different from polling stations).
2. Ensure safety of Voters, polling personnel and polling material
3. Continue implementation of Model Code of Conduct
4. Continue implementation of Election Expenditure Monitoring Guidelines
5. Polled EVM strong room (intermediate and outer cordon) and counting centre safety (Outer cordon-District Police Force).
6. EVM Strong Rooms and EVM warehouses.
c) Counting Day Deployment–
(i) CAPF
1. Forming the 3rd and the inner most cordon for protecting the strong room/ counting centre.
(ii) State Police
1. Intermediate and outer cordon security of the counting center.
2. Management of Victory procession. H. Activity and Timeline:
Sl
No. Activity Timeline Responsibility
1 Preliminary Vulnerability Mapping and Identification of critical PS Analysis 6 months before the date of poll of last Election DEO/SP
2 Arms, arms Shop verification, NBW Execution, Review of previous electoral offences, Raid on Illicit liquor 4 months before the date of poll of last Election DEO/SP
3 Assessment of availability of state Police Force and requirement of CAPF and sending the requirement of
CAPF To ECI 6-4 months before the date of poll of last Election CEO/SPNO

Sl
Activity Timeline Responsibility
No.
4 Training of Police
Personnel in reference to
Election Management 3 months before the date of poll of last Election State Police
Nodal Officer
5 Imposition of ban on carrying firearms and deposition of licensed arms Immediately after announcement of Election DM/SP
6 Preliminary review of Vulnerability Mapping and identification of vulnerable hamlets 2 months before the date of poll of last Election DEO/SP
7 Allotment of CAPF and their movement plan and logistic arrangement After announcement of Election CEO/SPNO/
State force coordinator
8 Arrival of CAPF, Area Domination After announcement of Election DEO/SP
9 Requisition and ensuring availability of Air ambulance, Helicopter, Satellite Phones, NDRF / SDRF, Bomb disposal squads, etc After announcement of Election CEO/SPNO
10 International and Interstate
Border Sealing with establishment of Nakas and meeting with border area administration and police. After announcement of Election C S / D G , C E O /
SPNO DM/ SP
11 Implementation of MCC After announcement of Election DEO/SP
12 Monitoring of Law &
Order situation a. Weekly
b. Daily 4 months before the date of poll of last Election After announcement of Election CEO/SPNO DEO/SP
13 Customization of Force deployment guidelines based upon prevailing Law
& Order situationa. at the state level
b. at the district level After the announcement of Election CEO/SPNO/State force coordinator General/ Police
Observer/DEO/
SP
Sl
No. Activity Timeline Responsibility
14 Review and finalization of a. Vulnerability Mapping
b. Critical PS Within 7 days of announcement of Election After withdrawal and finalization of candidates DEO/SP
General/ Police
Observer/DEO/
SP/
15 Actual Deployment of
Force for Pre-Poll, Poll and
Post Poll activities After the announcement of
Election DEO/SP in consultation with General/Police observer.
I. Intra state/Interstate movement plan in phased elections
Where elections in the state are to be held in phases, or where CAPF and state police has to be deployed in another state in the subsequent phase of elections, movement of CAPF and State police from one phase to the other should be made a sub part of the final deployment plan. This movement plan, finalized by the state force coordinator should be included in the final deployment plan, to facilitate smooth transition of forces from one phase to the other. The CAPF and the state forces should be briefed about the movement plan during their training sessions. This movement plan should inter alia include the following:
a) Proposed date of transportation.
b) Number of vehicles required for transportation and strategies for requisition (within the district/ from elsewhere in the state)
c) Details of lodging and messing facilities/halts in the transit route.
d) Post transportation, details of relieving of vehicles requisitioned, including payment of hire charges to vehicle owners.
e) The above-mentioned sub plan should be submitted by the SP to the state force coordinator and shared with his counterpart in the concerned District/ state.
J. State Force Coordinator’s coordination with ECI, MHA, Railways, etc. for CAPF
The Force coordinator shall coordinate actively with the following:
a) For ensuring the following:
(i) Approval of the final state deployment plan from ECI.
(ii) Requisition of CAPF forces from MHA, allotted to the state after National level deliberations.
(iii) Issuing of state specific instructions from ECI and MHA to CAPF, from outside the state.
b) Ministry of Railways, for ensuring the following:
(i) Special trains for movement of CAPF forces into the state.
(ii) Allotment of adequate number of Coaches in special trains for safe and comfortable long journey of forces.
(iii) Priority needs to be accorded to Election special trains to ensure timely availability of forces in respective States.
(iv) Identification of safe and convenient points of disembarkation of forces in the state.
(v) Special messing facilities for forces on trains.
(vi) Arrangement of special trains by railways & food by IRCTC.
(vii) Single window booking system in Railways
c) Ministry of Defence for ensuring the following
(i) Availability of Air Force helicopters, for transportation of polling personnel and security forces in difficult areas/LWE areas.
d) Civil Aviation Ministry for ensuring the following
(i) Availability of aircraft for use as air ambulance in medical emergencies during the elections.
e) Shipping Ministry for ensuring the following:
(i) Availability of boats/ ships for transportation of polling personnel and security forces in coastal areas/islands.
f) State government for ensuring the following:
(i) Preparing force’s movement plan within the state.
(ii) Induction and de-induction of forces
(iii) Training of forces, to be conducted by nodal police officer (Training)
K. Role of State Nodal Police Officer
a) Role related to Logistics, Database and Welfare
(i) Creation of database of SPF& other forces with details of registration in the PER, telephone nos. etc.
(ii) Earmarking of accommodations and other logistics for troops till final de-induction.
(iii) Proper medical cover earmarking of super specialty hospitals, cashless treatment, air ambulance, helicopter etc.
(iv) Providing unique ID to troops.
(v) Timely pre-poll deployment of forces on threat perception.
(vi) Communication setup.
b) Role related to Pre-induction Training, counter IED training
(i) Since CAPF arrives only after the announcement of elections and details of deployment by the MHA, a proper orientation needs to be given about the role of CAPF vis-à-vis State police/local police and other coordination responsibilities. For capacity building of CAPF the following actions may be taken:
(ii) Initial briefing should be done by the state police officers in the holding areas.
(iii) Training should ideally be imparted at Coy clusters, at deployment locations.
(iv) The training should enable familiarization with the terrain, polling area, tactics and necessary dos and don’ts for operating in the area. Local troops should be actively engaged in this.
(v) Training of police personnel to be completed, documented, and reported by State Nodal Officer
(vi) On completion of training all personnel must be provided the standardized set of training material developed separately for the state security forces and separately for the CAPF.
(vii) The training material for polling personnel must contain briefing on the role of security personnel at the PS and the role of election polling staff vis-à-vis election security forces.
(viii) There is a system in western countries of issuing pocket cards to security personnel, outlining the issues that are likely to crop up, the legal provisions in that regard and their expected behaviour and the list of superiors/authorities in their contact details. This can be developed on a uniform basis by States.
c) Coordination Role
The State Police Nodal Officer and/or State Force Coordinator are jointly expected to coordinate with the following:
(i) National Force Coordination
(ii) ECI and MHA
(iii) CEO
(iv) Railways
(v) Civil Aviation
(vi) Defence
(vii) DMs and SPs
(viii) State Police Nodal Officers of all neighbouring states
d) Documentation Role:
Proper reporting and documentation of training must be ensured by State Nodal Officer for Police Training.
L. Setting up Control Rooms at state and district level
Fully equipped Control rooms should be set up at the State level and the district level, under the supervision of the State level nodal police officer and SP respectively, for:
a) Following movement of forces, from one phase to another
b) Establishing effective communication with forces on the move (QRTs, patrol parties etc.)
c) Monitoring of the general law and order in the run up to the poll.
d) Monitoring of specific events, which may develop into potential law and order situations, like Nomination processions, public rallies, visits of star campaigners etc.
e) Taking reports of execution of deployment plan for the poll day/ counting day.
f) Establishing effective communication system for reporting of emergency situations on the poll day (with election officials as well as with media), communicating instructions from authorized officers to handle emergencies and giving SITREPS to DM, SP, CEO and State level police nodal officers.
g) Separate Control Rooms for live streaming for web casting at State and District level.
M. Dos and Don’ts (Poll Day)
a) Ensure visibility of forces (mobile teams/check posts/polling locations) for area domination and confidence building, so that it acts as a deterrent to trouble makers.
b) Ensure that all sector magistrates, Zonal officers as well as police officers/ CAPF/SPOs stationed at polling stations have details (location, LL, and mobile numbers) of the nearest thana and the police control room.
c) Control room should be adequately manned and equipped, 24x7, for prompt reporting of and response to emergencies.
d) Check posts and barriers should be strategically positioned to check vehicles for movement of arms and goonda elements.
e) Border sealing should be effectively enforced.
f) Ensure strong mobility of election officials with adequate reserves at the booths, and in the area, to enforce code of conduct and provide support wherever required.
g) Ensure positioning of reserve forces in a way that they can quickly respond to emergencies.
h) Avoid congregation of mobile teams in one area, leaving other areas, unmonitored by proper monitoring of mobile teams from the control room.
i) Ensure proper monitoring of movement of polling parties from polling stations to collection centers, after completion of poll.
7.3 Additional Issues
A. Manner of static guarding of polling stations by the CAPF
For the duty of static guarding of polling stations, the CAPF shall take positions in the assigned polling stations on the poll-eve (day prior to the poll). The CAPF shall be primarily responsible for protecting the polling stations and regulating the entry inside the polling stations. In such cases one personnel of the CAPF shall position himself at the door of the polling station (either in static or oscillating mode) in order to observe the proceedings that are going on inside the polling station, as per the directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court. ‘Static guard duty in an oscillating mode’ is a situation when a building has multiple polling stations and CAPF deployed is not sufficient to cover every polling station (door). In such a situation, the CAPF personnel on duty at the entrance of the polling station may be asked to oscillate from one polling station door to the other and keep an eye on what is going on inside these polling stations and report to the officer in-charge of the CAPF or the Observer, if anything unusual is observed by him.
B. In the event of CAPF not reaching assigned PS
In all cases where CAPF has been assigned static guard duties but could not reach the assigned polling stations due to any reason, the poll shall not commence.
C. Solely and exclusively CAPF assigned polling stations:
In all such solely and exclusively CAPF assigned polling stations, in any case, Local State Police shall not replace the CAPF at polling stations and no senior officer of the local state police, with or without contingent shall position himself at such polling station and exercise any supervision and control over the CAPF at the polling stations.
D. Composite teams in certain cases:
In some cases CAPF and the local state police can be mixed to form composite teams to maximize the static coverage of polling stations by CAPF. In such cases, the CAPF personnel will take position at the door of the polling station and CAPF will continue to report to its Company Commandant, without any interference from the state police contingent.
E. Posting unarmed local police personnel at each PS where CAPF is on static duty:
Wherever CAPF is on static guard duty (whether exclusively or compositely with local police), it is advised that two unarmed local state police personnel/ Home Guards (and in any case, a minimum of one) be posted at each polling station premise so that in case of any requirement, reinforcements of local police can be called.
F. CAPF assigned duties on mobile patrolling duties:
When CAPF is assigned duties of mobile patrolling on assigned routes (election sectors) having a cluster of polling stations, the CAPF contingent shall ensure the supervision and guarding of polling stations falling on that sector (route). They will be moving from one polling station to another polling station, ensure the fidelity of the election process in the polling stations and assist (or join) the sector officers and sector police officers of that sector to accomplish it in a more effective manner. In such mobile mode, the CAPF mobile shall be provided a list of critical polling stations (and the uncovered polling stations) and vulnerable localities falling on that route. The CAPF mobile, while patrolling, should maintain constant and close supervision on such polling stations. For the purpose, it should also be in constant touch with election sector officer and sector police officer on that route as well as the micro-observers or even the Presiding Officers of the Polling Stations.
G. Providing information to CAPF for route patrolling:
For such mobile patrolling duty, the CAPF shall be provided sector route maps (sketch) of each sector/route which is under their charge. The sketch should indicate the polling station’s locations, their sensitivity gradation, the sector officer’s name and contact number, RO’s and Observer’s name and contact numbers, contact numbers of officials on static duty and officers specifically assigned to that sector.
H. Assigning flying squad duties to CAPF:
When CAPF is assigned duty in a ‘flying squad’ mode, the CAPF contingent will only be in- dictated an area. The squad will be fully and constantly mobile and undertake random surprise checks on polling stations falling within the area and report to the district control room on their findings. They shall not be attached to any polling station or sector in particular. The flying squad shall be accompanied by a ‘zonal magistrate’. I. EVM escorting by CAPF post-poll:
After the poll is completed, the polled EVMs and the polling personnel shall be escorted by CAPF contingent to the Receiving Center. J. Guarding EVM strong room by CAPF:
CAPF shall also be assigned the duty of guarding the strong room where the polled EVMs shall be stored and kept till the day of counting. K. In case of non-availability of sufficient CAPF:
The local state armed police can also get deployed exclusively at polling stations, when enough CAPF is not available. This shall however be done under the specific instructions of the Election Commission through its Senior Most General and Police Observers. In such cases the local police shall not stand at the entrance door of the polling stations and instead would be positioned away from the line of sight of the polling personnel inside the polling station. He shall stand at such distance from the door that there is no scope of any apprehension about his interference in the poll proceedings going on inside the polling station.
L. Briefing of CAPF:
CAPF personnel should be properly briefed by the concerned officer in charge. If the deployment is in a Police Station, the SHO shall brief. If it is in a district, the DM and SP will do so with respect to the challenges in the area, the appropriate responses, the do’s and don’ts etc.
M. Briefing about CAPF deployment to election functionaries:
Some sort of briefing may be given to the Observers and Returning Officers about the role and duties, structure & functioning of Security Forces before deployment of the Forces for elections. Polling parties may be strictly advised to travel along with the security Forces.
N. Deployment plan to enable smooth intra-state/inter-state movement/ deployment:
Chief Secretaries and CEOs of states are directed by the Commission to ensure that the State government may be instructed to prepare the deployment plan well in advance in consultation with the Nodal Officers of concerned Forces to enable smooth intra-state/inter-state movement/ deployment of the troops.
7.4 Post Poll Day Planning
After the Poll Day planning, the focus shifts on counting day. However, before this there may be occasion for re-poll which would require identical arrangements as required for the poll day.
A. Deployment and de-induction from Counting Centre
a) If there exists sufficient gap between the polling and the counting the force deployment plan needs to be worked upon for de-induction as well as partial continuance until the counting day.
Invariably in phased elections the de-induction is inbuilt in the deployment plan itself for optimization of the use of security forces this de-induction process needs to be divided in two parts: -
(i) De-induction after the poll day and.
(ii) De- induction after the counting. As this would require centralized instruction, it is necessary that necessary details are made available to the ECI and the MHA well in advance.
Invariably the location of the counting centers would be quite less, on an average one per district, the deployment of forces to safeguard the centers would be simpler.
B. Role of Railways in De-Induction
(i) Arrangement of special trains by railways & food by IRCTC.
(ii) The de-induction process requires meticulous planning on the part of Railways. Railways need to deploy special trains for the timely and safe movement of the forces.
IRCTC shall make necessary arrangements for food and other facilities (bedding etc.) during the movement of forces in the trains.
C. Role of DGP/State Force Coordinator
Releasing of CAPF on time for deployment in other states
7.5 Requirements of CAPF/SAP from the State
A. Arrangement of accommodation and other logistics by state authorities till final de-induction.
B. Accommodation and transportation, as per authorization, must be pre-checked, and any shortcomings noticed must be addressed immediately.
C. A Liaison officer should be provided to coy (s) to accompany them till their departure from state.
D. A detailed booklet containing all necessary information regarding their place of deployment, route map, previous incident profiles, lists of extremists/Maoists, modus operandi, important communal and local issues, nearby hospitals, lists of cashless hospitals, important contact numbers, etc, shall be provided on arrival in the state.
E. Adequate and roadworthy transportation with trusted and experienced drivers, as per latest guidelines of ECI shall be made available.
F. Multiple refueling stations must be earmarked and identified when large number of Coys are deployed in a district to avoid the unnecessary rush of forces at a refueling place
G. Accommodation for a coy, as per scale decided by Election Commission of India should be made available.
H. For Coys being inducted from neighboring states, if the distance is around 300 km, road transportation must be arranged by the election-bound state.
I. Advance liaison should be made by the state if the election is in any island or
area that can only be reached by steamer or Ship.
J. The district wise deployment plan needs to be communicated well in advance to all concerned, for seamless coordination.
K. Pre-Induction training must be organized for the newly inducted Coys covering all the aspects of the area.
L. The Forces may be deployed in a contiguous manner for better command, control and operational efficiency.
M. The principle of Right force at the Right place must be adhered to.
N. Shadow areas must be identified and arrangements of communication to address such areas need to be planned and intimated to concerned.
O. Local police representative with each coy be provided on arrival in the state to take them to their accommodation/deployment locations.
P. Cases of payment of Ex gratia, and payment of honorarium and food allowances should be done within a stipulated time.
Q. Information about advance tie-up with super specialty and multispecialty hospitals for cashless treatment shall be shared to Coys Commander.
R. Information about area-specific diseases like Malaria etc, if any, precautions and medicines must be provided.
S. Arrangement for Air Ambulance and chopper for meeting any exigency need to be catered for.
T. The Coys earmarked for strong room security duty should not be deployed at booths (as the strong room security is required to be taken over D-2 days). U. Arrangements of Drones/UAVs for operational support.
V. Establishment of Joint security control rooms at district level.
W. All accommodation, transportation and logistic support must remain with forces, till the final de-induction.
X. In case Mahila Coys are deployed, arrangements should be made as per their specific and special requirements.
Y. Defense material for Coys, as per requirement, must be provided.
7.6 Amenities for the CAPF/SAP The presence of large number of CAPF for long duration necessitates the availability of all the basic amenities for the comfortable stay and effective functioning of the CAPF on ground. It is incumbent upon the local administration to provide these amenities and ensure its periodic monitoring for the betterment of the forces. ( refer to Chapter 5)
7.7 Communication Plan
Multiplicity of activities at National, State, District and polling station level is an important feature of general elections in India. The importance of strategic communication planning in elections cannot be undermined. It is at the heart of successful election planning and management. Therefore, robust and thoroughly tested communication plan will help in many ways. It should be prepared well in advance. Right from drawing up the State and District Election Management Plan (SEMP and DEMP), up to counting and result declaration; tracking and monitoring of these multifarious activities is an important task for all election offices. This is primarily achieved by establishing reliable and secure communication linkages between the various stakeholders.
Communication plan has been separately dealt with in the manual on Force Multiplier and Non-CAPF measures. For details of communication plan, the concerned manual can be referred to.
CHAPTER 8 CAPACITY BUILDING
8.1 Introduction The police machinery plays a key role in the conduct of elections in a peaceful and orderly manner. But a peaceful election free from violence need not necessarily be a free and fair election. Correct and unbiased implementation of the election laws and Election Commission’s directions is necessary. That presupposes a familiarity with the laws and instructions and can come about only through proper and periodic training. State Nodal Police Officer for Election Training is required to prepare training calendar and content and to ensure completion of maximum training before announcement of polls. The State Nodal Police Officer shall undertake training of all police officials/ constabulary associated with conduct of elections in a systematic manner for Election Training.
Training to all officers/officials likely to be deployed in the election process will be conducted as per the directions of ECI.
8.2 A training plan may be prepared as follows:
Personnel to be trained Training Place Training Date Line
State Level Master Trainers IIIDEM, New Delhi 4 months before the poll
Range IGs, SPs, Addl SPs State PHQ 2 months before the poll
Deputy SPs, Inspectors, SHOs, Police Sub-Inspector/InchargeP olice lines District 1-2 months before the poll
Police constables and Head constables, all other police personnel (including CAPF) to be deputed in polling stations, mobile parties Sub Division/Thana level/ Police line/Area of deployment 1 month before the poll
8.3 An illustrative list of the crucial topics for training is as follows:
Nature of Category of Indicative Topics
Training Officers
General
Training State Level
Nodal Officers/
Heads of Range/ Superintendents of Police/ Dy.SP/
SHO i) Vulnerability Mapping and confidence building measures ii) Identification of critical polling station and critical clusters.
iii) Preventive Measures – special drives iv) Misuse of money power and election expenditure.
v) Prevention of Defacement of Public properties.
vi) Discipline during nomination process. vii) Communal harmony. viii) Poll day and counting day duties.
ix) CAPF coordination and Deployment of force x) MCC provisions xi) Poll process xii) Relevant legal provisions xiii) Other Issues
Role Based
Training Dy. SP/PI/PSI/
ASI • Web Portal Management and Daily Report Compilation
- Expenditure Monitoring
- Flying Squads and Static Surveillance Teams (SSTs)
- Inter-State Border Check Post Operations
- Control Room Operations
- Prohibition & Excise
- Election Cell Management
- Police Patrols & Coordination with Executive Magistrates
- Security to Candidates/Observers
- Strong Room Security & Security of EVM/ VVPAT in transit
- Incident Reporting
Poll Day
Duties PI/PSI/ASI/HC/
PC & Home
Guards • Security at the Polling Stations
- Coordination with CAPF/SAPF, Presiding Officer & Polling Staff
- Do’s & Don’ts for Security Staff
8.4 Role of State Police headquarter - capacity building of the State and Central Security Forces:
(i) The State police headquarters should develop a checklist for the key officials associated with the conduct of elections, including the CAPF, indicating their duties and responsibilities in the light of instructions being issued from the Election Commission of India from time to time. The following Nodal Officers (not below the rank of IG) should be appointed at the State Level for the following -
Sl. No Nodal Officer Functions
1 Nodal Officer (EVM/
VVPAT Security, Induction/De-induction of
CAPF and Welfare) Co-ordination with IGP (Ops), CAPF, MHA, New Delhi and for making logistical arrangements for their movement & stay
- Welfare of force deployed for Election
Bandobast (Police/SRPF/ CAPF /HG/
GRD/SRD etc.)
- Safety & Transportation of Electronic Voting Machines & VVPAT
2 Nodal Officer (Training) • Prepare Training Calendar in coordination with Chief Electoral
Officer and State Police Nodal
Officer for the training of
Commissioners of Police/Heads of
Range/ Superintendents of Police/
Commandants/Sub-Divisional Police
Officers/Station House Officers
- Organise role based training programs to Police, SRPF, Home Guards and CAPF.
3 Nodal Officer
(Postal Ballots and e-Payment) • Data Base & Postal Ballot Papers for Police Force /SRPF/Home Guards / GRD/ SRD etc.
- Data Base & Postal Ballot Papers for
Police Force /SRPF/Home Guards /
GRD/ SRD (Out State Duty)
- E-Payment of honorarium to Police Force /SRPF/Home Guards / GRD/ SRD etc.
4 Nodal Officer (SVEEP
Activities) Coordination with Chief Electoral Officer regarding organising of SVEEP activities at State/District level
Sl. No Nodal Officer Functions
5 Nodal Officer
(Social Media Monitoring and Cybercrime) • Monitoring of SMS, Facebook, Instagram, Tweeter and other Social Media Platforms regarding online campaign activities
- Monitor Cyber contents regarding objectionable contents in the context of elections and coordinate with Districts for taking action in coordination with CERT.IN and other agencies.
6 Nodal Officer
(Web Portal Management
& Daily Reports) Coordinate with Districts for collection of data related to Law & Order Report I & II and submission of Daily Reports
7 Nodal Officer
(Communication Plan) Mobilise resources, identify black spots/shadow areas and to workout
Communication Plan in coordination with
State Police Nodal Officer
8 Nodal Officer
(Inter-State Border
Coordination) Coordination with neighbouring States/
UTs regarding setting up of Inter-State
Border Check Posts, arrest of Inter-State Criminals, and coordination on issues related to deposition of licensed arms, dry day, sharing of intelligence etc.
(iii) Besides, a reference material should also be prepared both for state and central police, indicating the relevant sections of Indian Penal Code, the R.P Act and provisions of Model Code of Conduct (MCC) that are relevant during the course of elections.
(iv) This reference material should indicate the nature of offence and the relevant Sections whether cognizable or non-cognizable and the action to be taken in case of any violation. This reference material should be made available to all field officials as well.
(v) There should be proper coordination between the CEO’s office and the police headquarter.
(vi) The DGP may identify a senior officer who would function as a nodal officer to remain in touch with the CEO on day-to-day basis so that the Commission’s instructions from time to time are followed up and implemented.
The Commission has issued several directions regarding training of police personnel associated with conduct of elections; they are consolidated here with additional aspects.
A. At State/Police HQ level:
a) State Nodal Officer for Training: The State shall appoint a senior officer, not below the rank of IGP, preferably the ADGP/IG Training; as the Nodal Officer at State level to arrange, oversee, prepare content, monitor and report the training of the state police forces. The senior Police officer who would function as nodal officer should remain in touch with the CEO on day-to-day basis; so that the Commission’s instructions from time to time are followed up and implemented.
b) Levels of training: Training will be organized at two levels: at the state level at Police HQs; and at the district level, which will include Block/Tehsil/Taluka level.
c) Trainees from state police: In a general election, all members of the State Police Force from top to bottom shall undergo relevant training.
d) Other trainees: Similarly, all members of the State Armed Police and Home Guards shall also be given relevant training.
e) Content: Standardized, high quality and need- based training should be imparted; this should include giving of handbooks, and other training material such as pocket books, Flyers, etc.
f) Checklists: A checklist will be prepared/ updated for the key officials associated with the conduct of election indicating their duties and responsibilities in the light of instructions being issued from the Election Commission of India from time to time.
g) Reference material: Besides, reference material should also be prepared indicating the relevant Sections of various Acts that are relevant during the course of elections. It should indicate the nature of offence and the relevant Sections whether cognizable or non-cognizable and the action to be taken in case of any violation and should be made available to all.
h) Coordination: Proper coordination between the CEO’s office and the police headquarters is to be established. Any instruction connected with maintenance of law-and-order preparation of State/district level deployment plan of CAPF etc., the guidelines should be immediately brought to the notice of police headquarters.
B. At district level
a) Incorporating recent instructions of ECI in Training module:
The DEO-cum-District Collector/DM will hold a meeting with SP and senior police officials and apprise them of all the recent instructions of the ECI that must be incorporated for training at the relevant levels. The attention should be drawn to Commission’s instructions regarding maintenance of law and order, execution of non-bailable warrants, seizure of illegal arms, surrender of licensed weapons, enforcement of excise law, action against bootleggers, restriction on use of vehicles, instruction regarding prior permission for campaign vehicles, ban on use of any vehicle for transporting voters on the day of poll etc.
b) Training on enforcement of MCC:
The enforcement of MCC is the joint responsibility of the district electoral administration as well as the police administration. Clear accountability should be spelt out when the district administration / RO forms MCC squads/teams. There should be a specific accountability for the police officials at the Thana level.
c) Training regarding Complaint Monitoring System in the district:
This should also be introduced for tracking election related violence and offence; and training must take care of this aspect.
d) Training on analysis of offence history of the polls:
The DEO and SP will review the status of the election related cases during the previous election and expedite follow up action in this regard. Police personnel must be trained to collect such information and analyze it and take follow up action.
e) Training on concept of vulnerability mapping and identification of critical polling station:
i) The Commission has introduced the concept of vulnerability mapping and specific process for identifying the critical polling stations and critical clusters (refer circular no. 464/L&O/2023/EPS(VM) dated 21.06.2023.
ii) As the vulnerability mapping gives valid inputs for identification of critical polling stations and critical clusters, the entire concept should be explained to the cutting-edge police officials properly by the DEO and SP.
[The details of vulnerability mapping have been described in the Chapter V of this manual.]
f) Training on various aspects of misuse of money power and election expenditure:
i) The misuse of money power has emerged as a big challenge to the free and fair election process. Feedback has been received about candidates indulging in various methods to induce the voters which includes direct payment of cash that amounts to bribery and other forms of inducements such as supply of liquor, food packets, holding of lunch and dinner parties in the name of “birthdays” and other “anniversaries” to give election related inducement, distribution of gifts in the name of mass-wedding and so on. During the election process, a close tracking by each Thana officer of such payments and other forms of inducement at their level is essential.
ii) The field level election machinery/police administration should work as a team to track such types of malpractices. Whenever such event takes place, video coverage of such events shall be ensured so that sufficient documentary evidence is created.
iii) It is noticed that liquor is transported even from the far away States to the election going States. Proper checking at the inter-State border and commercial tax check post will be helpful in tracking such transportation of liquor. Whenever a consignment of such liquor is intercepted, proper investigation should follow to trace the origin of such supply and the destination.
iv) A proper investigation is essential to establish linkage between the election process and the supply of such inducements. Media should be briefed whenever such consignments are seized. A proper orientation about this should be given to the police officials during training programmes.
v) Information on the Commission’s instructions about ceiling for expenditure in election, the details of Section 77 of R.P Act regarding the list of star campaigners to be submitted by the recognized party and the implications therein should be explained to the police officials.
vi) Section 171 H which deals with the illegal payment by any person for furthering interest of a candidate should be explained to the police officials during training programme.
g) Training on issues related to defacement of public properties
i) The Election Commission has been issuing a detailed instructions regarding prevention of Defacement of Public Property and other connected issues from time to time.
ii) The steps to be taken to implement the Commission’s order in the context of prevailing law if any; applicable to the State should be properly explained.
iii) The methodology to be adopted for enforcement of Commission’s instruction should be discussed in the training programme and explained to the field officials.
h) Training on issues related to discipline during nomination process
i) During the filing of nomination, the candidate can be accompanied by only four other persons. This restriction by and large is being strictly followed. However, there are instances in which these instructions are not followed resulting in chaotic situation inside the RO’s room.
ii) In order to ensure that proper discipline is maintained and the Commission’s instructions regarding restriction of persons, a nodal officer needs to be identified and trained by the SP of the district; who would be responsible for sanitizing the area of RO’s premises and ensure that only the permitted number of people are allowed to go inside the RO’s room and the entire proceeding should be video graphed.
iii) The SP should properly explain duties and responsibilities of the nodal officer during training session.
iv) Publication of election pamphlets in violation of Section 127 A of the RP Act, 1951 needs close tracking and monitoring.
i) Training on aspects that impact upon communal harmony
i) The police administration should remain vigilant about circulation of campaign material which can affect the communal harmony.
ii) The provisions of electoral law as well as model code of conduct in this regard shall be explained to the police officials during training programme.
j) Training about Poll Day and Counting day duties
An orientation should be given to the police officials about the polling process on the poll day and other connected issues and about the duties and responsibilities of various police officials on poll day with reference to security at polling station, patrolling of the catchment’s areas, tracking of areas identified as vulnerable, transportation of polled EVMs, sealing and guarding of strong rooms and the counting day arrangements.
k) Training on how to coordinate with the CAPF
i) Whenever CAPF are deployed in a district/constituency, a proper coordination has to be ensured so that the deployment of CAPF becomes more effective and functional. Hence, a proper orientation needs to be given about the role of CAPF vis-à-vis State police/local police and other coordination responsibilities.
ii) The district should also prepare material to be given to the CAPF, that is: list of vulnerable pockets, terrain and weather of the district, list of PS and locations, communication plan, do’s and don’ts for the CAPF, plan for pre-poll deployment, etc.
l) Directory of electoral administration
i) A directory of key functionaries of the electoral administration both civil and police should be prepared indicating the names, designation, landline and mobile numbers for better coordination between civil & police authorities.
ii) This directory should be handed over during training to all key personnel; and also to the senior CAPF personnel
m) Preparing the training material for CAPF
i) Training material should be carefully designed to include aspects that will be of immediate use for election purposes only.
ii) For LWE deployment a specially designed 3-7 days on the field training module, should be designed by the state.
iii) It should be complemented with the information specific to the District, where CAPF is proposed to be deployed.
iv) Dos and don’ts for operating in the fields should be prepared in advance and emphasized during the training.
v) Best trainers and resource persons should be identified and briefed in advance.
vi) Difficult and/or harsh terrain areas will also require specific training inputs to be given to the CAPF.
8.5 Motivation of the forces
Mobilization of forces and conducting the election is a daunting task and a major challenge for the police and the district administration. Pro-active intervention by the district police and the district administration through various initiatives to raise the morale of the forces can help reduce the stress level of the Security Forces.
Following are some of the measures which can motivate the Forces:
A. The Commission desires that an officer of the rank of Inspector General of Police in state Govt. in each & every state may be appointed as Nodal Officer with immediate effect to look into the matter of CAPF facilities like accommodation, Logistic, welfare measures, compensation, packed lunch or payment for refreshment charges etc. All the departments of the state government at the district level should be instructed to facilitate the forces from their side for the smooth conduct of elections.
B. Every District must appoint a District level Nodal Officer for Welfare, not below the rank of Deputy SP; and his contact details must be circulated to all members of the state and central police forces who are deployed for polls.
C. Provision for Proper medical cover earmarking of super specialty hospitals, cashless medical treatment, in case of evacuation, Air ambulance, helicopter support etc. for all policemen on election duty should be ensured. Enhancement of medical facilities in the areas with deployment of more Doctors from other parts of the state should also be ensured. Essential medicines to be kept in sufficient quantity at centralized holding area so that requisite dose is administered to everyone under supervision of the medical officer of local unit.
D. Proper accommodations, logistics support and distribution of food packets should be planned in advance. Visit of Senior Officials for monitoring the facilities provided to CAPF.
E. A security audit can be carried out which can help to place in demand the quantum of forces required for the elections, as lack of adequate force leads to extended duty hours which results in fatigue and frustration among the Police forces.
F. Proper Pre-induction training is to be imparted, to ensure that the security forces mobilized from outside perform their task without any fault; and also so that they familiarize themselves with the terrain, culture and custom as well as history sheeters, trouble mongers, local criminals and their ideology & tactics.
G. All the forces should be briefed and sensitized well in advance on the precautionary measures and should be instructed to observe it in letter and spirit.
H. Mandatory and personal briefing by DEO-cum-DM and SSP/SP of the district forces is a huge motivating factor. The teams should be briefed on routes and other aspects such as patrolling the periphery of the booth, providing security to the voters and the polling officials and escorting them safely after the election.
I. Route maps are to be prepared before one month taking into consideration the location of polling booths and intensity of anti-social activities with grid reference and be made available to all the operational parties.
J. Case study method can be used, photographs, video and films can be displayed and observed, various case studies can be discussed to avoid any untoward incidents.
K. Sufficient time gap between different phases of poll.
L. Participative decision making – coordination meetings at State/ district level
M. Every CAPF team should be provided with a representative of the local Police from the time of their induction till the completion of electoral process so that they could do their duty well because of their knowledge of terrain and local language.
N. Effective role of Railways and IRCTC in taking care of the forces is a motivator.
O. Helicopter services can be used to drop the security personnel and the polling officials in the booths located at inaccessible areas. This helps them conserve energy for poll day deployment.
P. Effective use of modern technology should be done and the security forces must be briefed about the fact that the district administration is able to respond very speedily to any untoward incident. To monitor all the developments on the poll day a control room is to be setup at the district Head Quarters with VHF, Mobile Phones and telephone facilities. The control room has to be made functional 24x7 from pre-electoral process to the completion of electoral process.
Q. Preparation of pre/during/post-poll daily movement plan for CAPF helps them get organized swiftly leading to less stress. Operational plans are to be chalked out well in advance and should be personally supervised by the SP. Safe return of the forces to their respective base camps is to be ensured.
R. Exigency plans such as evacuation of wounded in case of an encounter, replacement of EVMs in case of destruction and reinforcement of forces in case of any emergency are to be prepared well in advance and all the resources are to be put in place. All these must be shared with the forces. S. Recognition by ECI for good work and good recoveries.
T. Timely revision of various orders such as ex-gratia compensation, uniformity in remuneration.
CHAPTER 9 FORCE DEPLOYMENT AND EXECUTION - GENERAL
A good law & order situation is a pre-requisite for the conduct of free, fair, participatory, and peaceful elections. Hence, the State Police should mobilize maximum forces available at its disposal for election related work. The members of Auxiliary Forces such as Home Guards (HG), Village Defense Force (VDF) and Traffic Brigade (TRB) should be mobilized for working alongside police and to supplement the efforts for law enforcement during the period. The Central Armed Police Force (CAPF) are to be inducted for meeting the additional requirements of States/UTs for the conduct of elections.
CAPF and State Police have to be clear about objectives of task at hand at the time of execution. The CAPF will receive moving orders from the MHA during elections. It is essential that a review is taken up not below the level of Commandant and preferably at the level of DIG manning the forces to understand the tasks (specified and implied) and purpose of the deployment, and issue appropriate guidance to the members of the forces before they embark on election duties. State Police will function under the overall direction of the DGP, but the role of the SP of a district in clarifying the objectives of the task at hand to his force is crucial.
The responsibilities for the District Superintendent of Police and staff, procedures to be followed and systems to be put in place for execution of Force Deployment Plan are as follows:
9.1 Pre-Poll Arrangements
A. Planning
Planning for the election should start around 6 months before the probable date of election. The various elements of planning are enumerated below.
a) DM/SP Joint Touring: - Pre-poll preparations should start with the joint touring by DM-SP in various sensitive parts of the district. Their team effort should also be visible to the Public.
b) Putting the Right Person at the Right Place: - It is important that prior to the notification of the election, the right persons are put at the right places. This would primarily include the SHO of the Police Station and the In-charges of outposts and wherever possible the Gazetted officers like SDPO and additional SP as per the norms of ECI. Professional competence, possibility of law & order and fairness should become the criteria for deciding such postings. However, during the election process, if it is felt that a certain officer is working in a biased manner, he can be removed after prior approval of the Election Commissions of India.
c) Joint Visits of SDM/SDPO:
The SDPO, along with the SDM, should be directed to visit all the critical polling booths and vulnerable villages/hamlets in his area. The ADM/ Additional SP and DM/SP should also visit considerable number of critical polling booths and vulnerable villages/hamlets of the district. The visits by senior officers should serve the following purpose.
(i) They can have a more mature and holistic assessment of the problem and decide on steps to mitigate it.
(ii) Direct involvement of senior officer will allay any of the apprehensions of the voters.
(iii) It is also an opportunity for them to monitor the action taken by the SHO and have a firsthand knowledge about the situation at the ground.
d) Visit of SHO to all Polling Stations:
The SHO should be directed to visit all the Polling stations and all the villages in his AOR (area of responsibility). The purpose of the visit is many folds.
(i) Confidence building measure to reassure the voters and the public at large that they can cast their votes without fear. The SHO should be asked to visit, in particular, the area/village of the minorities. Minority should be treated as that section of voters who are in minority. For example, if a village is dominated by Muslims, then the local minority is treated as Hindus etc.
(ii) This visit is also to educate the voters about their rights and how to be vigilant for false voting.
(iii) The troublemakers are also identified by the SHO for preventive action. The status of the troublemakers of the previous elections, known goondas, history sheeters etc. should be found out during such visits.
(iv) He should use this visit to update the list of arms licenses in the villages, as they might have to be deposited later as per ECI guidelines.
(v) He should understand the demography of the village in terms of population and cast compositions. He should be able to feel the pulse of the Village – Caste, communal, political tensions if any, fears and apprehensions of the Voters during such visits.
(vi) Suitability of the Booth: Suitability of Polling Booths from the point of view of easy access by Polling parties and quick reinforcements should be evaluated. The building and its location should have enough open space, proper lighting and free from any intimidation or any one’s undue influence.
(vii) Criticality Analysis: Based on the parameters set by ECI, criticality analysis of booths should be conducted. On the basis of its criticality roof top morchas with armed personnel having 360-degree view should be made to act as a strong deterrent to the rowdies on the day of the poll.
(viii) Intelligence collection: Information about illegal arms, distillation, dump of explosives, etc. should be gathered. SHO is expected to keep himself abreast with all developments happening in the villages. If need be, he should be making another round of visits to the villages.
More mobility and accessibility mean more intelligence collections.
e) Force Assessment:
Based upon these visits, intelligence reports and ECI guidelines, an assessment should be made about additional requirements of force, arms, communication sets, telephones, anti-riot equipment, budget and vehicles. Available manpower and material resources should also be factored into these calculations. Based on ECI guidelines regarding force deployment, demand for CAPFs, Armed reserves, equipment and budgets should be projected by SP.
f) Preventive Actions:
Security proceedings under section 107/116 CrPC should be vigorously initiated. Generally, those involved in previous election related incidents, Aggressive party workers, Caste/ communal whipping elements, Goons / Goondas, Local arm twisters etc. should be covered under these proceedings. The SHO should make sure that all persons are bound down for heavy sureties during the interim period of 6 months u/s 116(3) CrPC. These proceedings are an effective way of ensuring peace. Sureties should immediately be seized in case of breach. Such administrative acts should be given wide publicity to send a message across to all and sundry. However, it is pertinent to note that it should not be made a tool of unnecessary harassment and partisan action. A close supervision and monitoring is required.
g) Special Drives:
Special drives should be conducted six months prior to the probable date of elections(as an estimate take date and month of the poll day of the last relevant General Election for action on:
(i) Wanted and rewarded criminals, warrantees, offenders in previous elections, illicit arms, distillation, narcotics, explosives and persons indulged in electoral offences etc.
(ii) Arrest and preventive detention of active criminals, political goondas, intimidators, HS, etc.
(iii) Checking of vehicles, lodges, explosive dumps.
(iv) Mitigation of outstanding disputes, primarily political in nature under 110 CrPC and special Acts of the States.
(v) Compilation of list of persons reported to have indulged in the offences under SC and ST(Prevention of atrocities) Act, 1989 during past elections.
(vi) Cancellation of arms licenses of persons with criminal records.
(vii) Deposition of licensed arms as per ECI norms
(viii) Checking of arms shops and explosive warehouses.
(ix) Opposition of bail of criminals who can affect the election process.
(x) Investigation and prosecution of all electoral offences registered in previous elections in each police station.
h) Proclamation under 144 CrPC to implement the model code of conduct.
i) Preventive Checking at the barriers to check on movement of arms, liquors, explosives and anti-social elements.
j) Strict compliance of Model Code of Conduct
(i) The DM and SP of the district should maintain contact with the political parties and the candidates to ensure compliance of the model code of conduct. MCC guidelines regarding control of misuse of vehicle during election period, Prohibition of sale of liquor, Prevention of defacement of public/ private property, Regulation of use of loudspeakers, Publication of brochure, pamphlets, etc., Restriction on moving with arms, Videography of critical events, Restriction on Public rallies with respect to time/ permission, compliance by political parties with regard to payment for the security arrangements for the public meetings, Canvassing stops 48 hours before polling.
(ii) Strict enforcement of code of conduct during the day of Nomination should also be ensured. We should remember that the political parties try to use the day of the nomination for show of their numeric strength. By enforcing the code of conduct to the hilt, the administration gets an opportunity to show their strength of conviction, force and the will to implement the code of conduct. Tempo builds up for the police force also. Adequate bandobast at the offices of Returning officers should be made at the time of filing nomination by prospective candidates, so as to prevent the happening of any untoward incident.
(iii) Any violation of Election Code of Conduct should entail strongest possible action.
k) Adequate Bandobast/Arrangements for Procession and Rallies:
Provide adequate bandobast for all procession and public meeting conducted by various political parties. All such meetings, rallies and processions should have prior permission. The political parties concerned will pay for the security arrangements made for any VIP visit as per ECI guidelines. Proceedings of all election meetings rallies, processions etc., should be covered and videography should be done for important meetings/rallies.
l) Effective Use of Media:
Media should be regularly briefed to publicize the measures taken for the conduct of free and fair election. On the day of the poll, security should be provided to the authorized journalists to cover such effective arrangements. Such information should also be disseminated to the media on the day of the poll.
m) Intelligence Machinery
Intelligence machinery should be tasked to collect evidence regarding the fielding of dummy candidates. If the intelligence reports and other indicators are sufficient reasons for declaring a candidate as a Dummy candidate it should be done so.
n) Facilitation of Conducive Environment:
It is important to create Conducive environment for the conduct of free and fair elections as also to build the tempo and morale of the force. Flag marches, media reports of firing practices, organizing open training camps to overawe the troublemakers is an important ingredient to pre-poll preparation. Publicity about the arrest/ detention of powerful persons with the potential to create trouble on the day of poll will be useful to create such environment.
B. Monitoring
It is important to monitor all police action to ensure compliance, impartiality, and corrective measures. One should never forget the tenet of supervision – “One that is not supervised is not done.” The officers should be accessible to the political parties, press and the public. They should hold regular meetings with them and do necessary verification of their complaints and take corrective action, if necessary.
C. Leadership & Motivation
It is important as a police leader to go around meet your men, build their morale, brief them on what to do in different circumstances, talk to them about their important role in the electioneering process. It is also important to meet men of the State and Central Police forces who have been assigned to you for election purposes, to eat with them, brief them and look after their needs. In nutshell, “Walk-the-Talk” Style of leadership and motivation has to be adopted. D. Training & Briefing:
Training films and booklets on code of conduct and duties come in very handy. Motivational slogans and talks inspire men at this critical juncture. The election code of conduct and the guidelines of the commission should be clear to them so that they take action for any violation. Do’s and Don’ts should also be briefed to them.
It is equally important to brief the men about the importance of their job in election process, need to be impartial and fair, punctual and courteous. They should be explained their duty, need to be firm and when to use force. They should be assured of support of their right actions. They should be told to carry the phone numbers of the nearest mobiles and police stations.
Extensive training should be given to the security personnel in personal security. It is also seen that sometimes the security personnel provided to the protectees, either themselves indulge in intimidation or tacitly allow the protectees to go in for electoral violence. These security personnel should be strictly briefed well in advance that they should refrain from such activities or else strongest legal action would be taken against them. E. Security to Candidates:
Security should be provided as per ECI norms to Candidates, Election Observers, EVMs. Many VIPs also visit the constituency for campaigning even till the last day. The force is normally busy in village visit, special drives, checking, etc. By the last day of campaigning, force gets already deployed for poll duty. So it is advisable to have a special task force to handle such VIP duties. They should be adequately briefed and work under the command of a superior officer. Whenever there is a visit in any police station area, this special task force could be sent to supplement the local SHO. F. Strong room:
The EVMs are kept in a makeshift strong room both prior to the dispatch of the polling parties and after the poll when they are kept in safe custody till counting. The venue for the strong room should take care of free ingress and outflow of vehicles. Anti- sabotage check, inner and outer cordons, round the clock Armed Police Guards/ CAPF guards, watchtowers, adequate flood and searchlights, access control, locking system, fire brigades, CCTV cameras should be provided for. G. Election Cell:
It should be headed by an officer of the rank of Dy.SP/PI and should be equipped with Telephones/ Fax Machines/ Copier Machines/Computers/ Scanners/ Internet Connectivity and other operational support. It should be set up under a senior police officer and fulfil the following responsibilities.
a) Monitor police action and send reports to the Election Commission of India and other authorities.
b) Compile list of sensitive booths and prepare deployment plan as per guidelines of ECI under the guidance of Observer.
c) Mobilize and keep and account of force mobilized from within the district, CAPF, State Armed Reserves, force from other districts, village Chowkidars, home guards, NCC cadets and other voluntary forces that can be deployed on the day of polls.
d) Prepare a reception counter to receive force from outside. There should be separate counters for arrival of force from different units. Prepare accommodation plan for the force that is mobilized from outside. Adequate provision should be made for drinking and bathing water supply, toilets, mess, electricity and lights, medical aid and basic comfort of stay.
e) Deploying men on other duties like mobiles, with magistrates, etc. and keep reserves.
f) Make and distribute duty cards.
g) Make the election booklet describing duties and deployment.
h) Make appropriate distribution of anti-riot equipment.
i) Monitor requisition and deployment of vehicles, communication sets, arms and ammunition, telephones etc.
j) Monitor election budget and distribute honorarium and food allowance for election duty and TA/DA advance.
k) Monitor dispatch and arrival of polling parties,
l) It also serves as the control room for the day of polls. H. Deployment Plan (Men & Equipment):
Deployment plan should be made according to the sensitivity of the booth. Deployment of force is a very sensitive matter and should be very closely supervised by the senior most officers. As per ECI guidelines he should lay down a policy of deployment, e.g. police personnel should be deployed in polling stations outside the area of the police station where they are presently posted, caste composition of police personnel on polling booth security should be appropriately mixed, etc. The deployment should be randomly checked to ensure that the policy is not violated. A trustworthy senior officer should be made responsible for this deployment. Pooling of various polling booth parties depending upon the route is another important task. Planning needs to be done to assign each personnel a vehicle number that he should board to move on day of dispatch of polling parties. Preparation of duty cards and its distribution, reception of force that comes from outside, arrangements for their place of stay, distribution of money of TA/DA and remuneration, redeployment of vehicles, arms, etc. are all jobs that require extensive planning. If not planned well, it would lead to a lot of confusion, demoralization of men and unnecessary hassles.
Planning would also go into deciding the distribution and deployment of communication sets, the primary and alternate channels and priority of communications. It is strongly advised to meticulously plan these aspects to ensure proper and smooth deployment and distribution of men and equipment. Energy saved in such matters can be effectively channelized on the poll day for good policing.
I. Dispatch of Polling Parties:
The polling parties and the police personnel are dispatched with the election material to the respective polling stations. Adequate bandobast should be provided at distribution centres at least two days prior to poll day together with police escort and police mobile parties so that polling officials carrying the EVMs and other poll material reach the polling booth, with the police escort, sufficiently in advance before the commencement of polling hour. The route should also be sanitized if it is required.
9.2 Poll Day ArrangementsA. Role of Police –
The suggestive action plan for the poll days is:
a) Area domination.
b) Strict enforcement of the code of conduct at the polling booths as per ECI norms. Some of the important tasks are listed below.
(i) No party booth to be allowed within 200 m.
(ii) Not more than two chairs and a table at the party booths
(iii) No posters and crowding allowed (iv) Queuing at the booth.
(v) Polling agents to sit properly and behave.
- No Minister, MP or MLA to be allowed to become polling agent.
- Polling agent is not allowed to take the electoral list outside the booth.
(vi) Rooftop armed duties on sensitive booths.
(vii) Frisking of voters.
c) All men on bandobast duty at polling stations should know where the nearest police stations, telephone, telegraph and wireless station are located and also the location of the nearest striking force, QRTs and headquarters of mobile party.
d) As soon as any trouble starts at any place requiring additional help, prompt intimation should be sent by the quickest available means to the appropriate authority.
e) Restrictions on movement of vehicles as per ECI guidelines, viz.
(i) Only vehicles having permit are allowed to ply.
(ii) Stoppage of misuse of vehicle permit. The election agent and one more person with him, who had no criminal background, would be allowed to move in the vehicles. The photographs of these two persons with authorization should be displayed on the vehicle windscreen to avoid ferrying of goondas and people.
(iii) No ferrying of voters allowed.
f) Nakas and checkpoint barriers to be strategically positioned with adequate force to check all vehicles for carrying of arms, anti-social elements and voters. Duties of personnel on check posts are:
(i) To meticulously check all vehicles and travellers for illicit weapons, bombs, arrack/liquor and anti – social elements.
(ii) To allow only valid permits as there is a ban on vehicular movement on the Election Day.
g) Border sealing so as not to allow criminals or anti-social elements to enter the district on day of the poll.
h) Force deployment as per sensitivity of the booth.
B. Role of other Officers –
a) Strong mobility of the district officials, SDPO and SHO with their strong reserves in the area to enforce code of conduct at booths, on roads and to provide support wherever required.
b) Adequate number of sector and zonal mobiles with reserves so that at least one mobile or the other reaches a booth every 15-20 minutes.
c) Sector mobiles to provide food packet to the men positioned on the booth or at the barriers.
d) Village mobile parties to be put inside those villages where there are apprehensions that the weaker sections or local minorities will not be allowed to even come out of their houses.
e) Tracking teams with video cameras with “difficult” persons to contain them. The tracking team should be briefed to arrest the person the moment he violates the law or the code.
f) Adequate reserves and anti-riot units to be positioned so that they can respond quickly. They should rush to areas where problem erupts on receipt of information and attend to the problem till the situation is brought to normal.
They should then return to headquarters to be available for further calls. C. Role of Mobile Teams:
a) To escort polling material, polling personnel and police persons provided for stationary bandobast.
b) To move on the route allotted to familiarize the route and gather advance information.
c) To move briskly on the Election Day touching all the booths on the minimum time.
d) To concentrate on trouble spots.
e) To rush to any area where trouble erupts and pass on the information to the police Station.
f) To Position itself in the last village at the time of completion of poll and escort back the polling persons and polled EVM from all the polling stations en-route.
g) VHF/UHF communication should be provided to all mobile parties, striking and special striking force and check posts.
h) To cross check all information given by the public, but in the process ensure that mobiles do not converge in an area, leaving some other areas free for booth capturing.
i) Ensure that the EVMs are escorted back after the poll.
D. Election Control Rooma) To monitor the progress of the poll.
b) To monitor acts of violence and booth capturing.
c) To send reinforcements wherever required after seeking permission of the concerned officer.
d) To send SITREPS (Situation Reports) to all concerned.
e) To receive complaints from any political party or candidate on the day of poll, document it and have it verified.
f) To keep in touch with the media to receive information about trouble and send reinforcements. Also to provide them with information.
g) To keep stock of reserves.
h) To monitor receipt of EVMs after the poll.
9.3 Post Poll Arrangements
A. Counting of Votes -
a) The venue of counting should be carefully chosen from the security point of view.
b) Anti sabotage check of the venue.
c) Fire and short circuit check of the venue.
d) Security at outer, intermediate and inner cordon.
e) Make an isolation cordon where only authorized persons are allowed.
f) Separate lanes for bringing polled EVM under escort.
g) Adequate barricading and meshing of counting area.
h) Barricading to provide lanes for separate assembly segment.
i) Search lights & watch towers to be tactically provisioned.
j) Deployment is done in a fashion that restricts entry of pass Holder and officials only. Entry should be based on positive identification. Frisking of every person entering the premises is ensured.
k) Food and tea for the force at the appropriate time should be also ensured.
B. Victory Procession RegulationVictory Procession post the declaration of results can be restricted/regulated. Normally liaisoning with the winning candidate helps. Strong arrangements have to be made to ensure that people of varying factions don’t clash.
C. Investigation of Election related cases –
The Police should complete the investigation of all election related cases expeditiously and file the police report in the concerned jurisdiction court immediately after the election process is over.
9.4 Specific measures suggested for augmenting the security atmosphere during poll cycle:
A. Daily Deployment Reporting of Area Domination Exercises, including videography:
It is observed that during the poll cycle and on poll day non-cognizable offences are committed in many states like: causing disturbance in public meetings and at polling station on poll day, political canvassing in religious congregation/ places, etc. Even if they are dealt with timely, and under appropriate sections of the applicable law or act, the perpetrators are out on bail in no time and the offence recurs, with an obvious element of political patronage. Therefore, it is suggested that a matrix may be prepared for Daily Deployment Reporting of all measures taken to dominate such areas such as: Patrolling or Area domination, giving details of names and PS of the area dominated, and preferably with a dated video of the places marked/ known to be sensitive. The video should be made available daily to the DM also. This will not only ensure that the objective of confidence building is being appropriately addressed, but it will also reduce the chances of misreporting by some politically aligned officers.
B. History-sheeters to be traced back to at least 5 years:
Area-wise list of anti-socials and history-sheeters may be traced back to 5-6 years rather than the latest one provided by district police so as to list out the names, which may have been deleted or kept out of the present list for obvious political considerations.
C. Sealing of all seized arms and ammunition as on date of poll notification:
The possibility of the practice of recycling of seized arms and ammunition cannot be ruled out. Therefore, the stock of illegal arms and ammunition that are shown as seized in a particular AC/PS area must be marked by ECI as sealed immediately on notification. The fresh drives against illegal arms etc. should be reflected separately on daily basis duly certified by the concerned SP of the district, thereby standing a guarantee against recycling of the old seized material. The only difficulty that might arise would be if some of the seized arms are called for as exhibit in the courts of law. However, ECI’s certification will keep both the DM and the SP accountable, and it will be simpler for the court of law also to take cognizance.
9.5 Putting a system in place for Monitoring
A. Law and Order Portal
B. Daily Law and Order report etc.
9.6 Risk Management:
An execution plan in elections runs the risk of failure in the following situations:
A. The deployment plan has been prepared in an ad hoc manner without taking into consideration ground realities. There is a tendency to simply prepare this plan in accordance with the plan prepared for the last general elections. This must be avoided at all costs.
B. Prioritization of deployment of specific type of forces, if not done on the basis of ground realities, will lead to a failed plan. The state and the district must look at the basket of forces available and prioritize on the basis of district level, AC level and PS level requirements.
C. Commitment of the state level and district level planners and implementers is required to ensure that the plan is implemented fully and as per norms.
D. The persons who will take the lead in executing the plan should be made very well versed with the plan, by the creators of the plan.
E. The deployment plan must have the scope of tweaking even at the last minute, if a situation develops and warrants it. Resistance to change in such a case will only make the plan ineffective.
F. The state and the district must select the right personnel for the right jobs in the deployment plan. it is the most crucial aspect of an execution.
G. The consequences of knowingly not implementing the plan must be made very clear to all levels. The fact that all election functionaries including security personnel are under the disciplinary control of the ECI during elections, must be brought to the notice of all personnel.
H. Lack of foresight in planning for resources can lead to a difficult situation. both the state and the district level administrative machinery should take up this work in a very focused manner and ensure sufficient reserve in all resources, including equipment, transport, manpower, etc.
I. Good training is the game changer in any plan’s execution. This must be taken very seriously and no deployed personnel must remain untrained.
J. Deployment plan must take into account potential problems. This requires an acute sense of understanding of local realities.
CHAPTER 10 FORCE DEPLOYMENT AND EXECUTION- IN LWE/ INSURGENCY/MILITANCY AFFECTED AREAS
Conduct of elections in LWE/Insurgency/Militancy affected areas; pose an altogether different challenge as compared to rest of the areas. Maoists are averse to all democratic processes, which include elections also. They resort to the use of armed and military tactics to sabotage any such initiatives. To achieve their objective, they may resort to armed violence, terror, intimidation, extortion, misinformation campaign in media and human right bodies, thereby subverting criminal justice administration. No general standards can be drafted for such areas, as the challenges are area specific. The conduct of free and fair elections therefore needs an area specific approach.
10.1 Pre-Poll Preparations:
A. Preparations should start at least 6 months prior to polls.
B. These preparations should start with identification of forces well versed with LWE/Insurgency/Militancy areas from within and outside the State.
C. The establishment formalities which include allocation of unique IDs to Coys and formation of ad hoc battalions should also be completed in time so that the said forces can be detailed during the whole election process by common nomenclature.
D. Familiarization/induction training for Coys coming for elections duties in LWE/Insurgency/Militancy affected area shall be planned. Duration of such training may vary, depending upon violence profile of the area.
E. Principle of right force at right place should be adopted, as the forces which have LWE/Insurgency/Militancy exposure will deal challenges far more efficiently.
F. Colour coding of various constituencies as per security vulnerability should also be carried out.
G. Resource mapping in terms of detailing of BDD team/Dog Squad/special equipment etc. and availability of police personnel and equipment from within and outside the state should be carried out. Based on various modes/ principles, like area security vs dedicated security approach for the polling booths, deployment planning & requirement of additional forces should be worked out much in advance. It should be kept in mind that there is a limitation to the availability of additional forces for the purpose of election.
H. Multiple scenarios should be worked out while calculating the additional requirement of forces, viz. with/without relocation of polling booths.
I. Detailed vulnerability analysis from the point of view of LWE/Insurgency/ Militancy intensity should also be carried out.
J. These preparations should also entail shifting/relocation of polling booths, staggering of polls, mobilization of forces from various states, deployment yardsticks, sensitivity analysis of polling booths etc.
K. Focus on training of State Police on IED recovery/handling, use of communication equipment etc. should also be started in advance.
L. The planning and management of elections in such areas should be done with an objective of no loss of human limb or life.
M. Predictable vehicular movement on areas/Roads which are IED prone in highly Maoist affected zones should be avoided. In unavoidable circumstances, prescribed SOP have to be followed.
N. All the elements of logistics viz, additional campsites, temporary holding areas, preparation of place of stay, basic amenities should also be planned in advance.
O. Regular demining operations of important roads which will primarily be used by incoming security forces should also be part of SOP of pre poll preparation.
P. All critical trunk routes should also be sanitized by de-mining and ROP.
10.2 Principles/Methodology of Relocation:
For timely decision the proposal for relocation of polling booths in the desired format should be forwarded to the office of CEO of the state by the DEO, within a specified time prior to the date of polling. Given the situation that candidates are finalized just few days before elections, consent from them comes quite late. Instead, the consent of all the district representatives of major political parties should be taken and given due weightage so that deployment and field planning does not remain pending for finalization till the last moment. Once candidates are finalized, their view can also be taken and minor corrections in the proposal can be considered. A. Deployment of Forces:
After the completion of induction training, troops should be deployed at the specified forward location 7 day prior to the polling date, so that area domination, flag marches and reconnaissance of polling booths is conducted as a pre-poll deployment and confidence building measure. This will also facilitate timely and smooth deployment of troops at polling booths before the day of poll.
Deployment of Security Forces in LWE/Insurgency/Militancy areas for election purpose will primarily depend upon the security forces. Quantum and quality/ exposure of force available for this purpose. If the forces available are less than the field requirement, then instead of deploying in each booth in inadequate numbers and being vulnerable, adequate deployments can be planned in highly Maoist critical booths and others less critical can be covered by area security approach through patrolling and area domination.
Deployment of forces has to be done on the basis of area vulnerability, security equipment available with the force and prior experience in LWE/ Insurgency/Militancy area.
B. Induction/ De-induction:
a) Induction and de-induction may involve a huge (100s of kms) road opening and demining operation exercise which may require mobilization of large numbers of BD/IED squads and DSMDs in advance.
b) For safe induction, and from handling capacity and logistics point of view; landing stations should be identified in advance in consultation with Railway authorities.
c) Induction of forces from outside the state should take place at least 21 days prior to the polling dates.
d) Effective ROP should be laid to ensure safe and secure induction of these forces into these LWE/Insurgency/Militancy areas.
e) Adequate BD/IED squads should be deployed for this purpose.
f) Refresher training on counter IED measures for all BD/IED Squads needs to be conducted well before their deployment.
g) Similarly, proper planning should be done for inter-phase movement of forces. Sufficient time gap of minimum 10 days should be provisioned for de induction of forces into the next phase of election. More care to be exercised for safe and smooth de-induction of the troops.
h) Effective Area domination/ROP should be ensured enroute and in / around the polling booths.
i) State authorities have to extend all possible support for final deinduction of the troops.
10.3 Campaign Security:
A. Campaign security is of prime importance in Maoist affected areas. However, ensuring such security in Maoist areas involve complex time taking processes that require considerable effort, resources, planning and tactics. These security operations are not only physically exhausting but also involve large force mobilizations & life-threatening risks. Therefore, it is advised that a SOP be put in place and the candidate be advised accordingly. The operational part of SOP should be intimated to all the political parties to facilitate a transparent security environment.
B. It is to be noted with concern that, despite repeated instructions and letters to candidates, their seriousness towards following SOP is not as desired. In future, for more effective compliance, nodal officers of the rank of inspectors/ sub-inspectors should be designated for each candidate. Nodal officer will remain in touch with the candidate, take his location from time to time, get his next day’s program and will intimate the control room, relevant police station and SDPOs.
C. Similarly, VIP visits and bandobast arrangements for public rallies should not be left to the political parties, owing to election expenditure booking considerations and citing code of conduct. Security cannot be compromised.
D. Support from PWD, Health and Forest department is required for making requisite security arrangements. DM/SDMs should be instructed to play proactive role to instruct these departments to cooperate with police to ensure fool proof security arrangement.
10.4 Infra/Resources:
Conduct of elections in LWE/Insurgency/Militancy areas requires mammoth logistics arrangements. State governments should make adequate budgetary provisions to handle such arrangements. The deployment locations should be finalized by the DEO much in advance. Minimum basic facilities like toilets, water supply, accommodation, electricity, communication, etc. should also be ensured. For example, adequate budgets for defense material (Sand bag, Balli, tin sheet, concertina coil, Barbed wire coil, Halogen lamp, electric wire, flexible wire, generator set etc.) should be provisioned.
Modular plastic toilets should be made available in large quantities.
10.5 Training:
A. Training syllabus for induction should be designed for 3-7 days depending upon the exposure of the forces to similar field threats.
B. Training syllabus should be carefully designed to include only aspects that will be of immediate use for election purposes only.
C. Pre-Induction training of all the arriving forces should be conducted for the specified period to familiarize them with routes to polling booths, tactics, terrain, incident history, modus operandi of Maoists and necessary do’s and don’ts for operating in the area. Focus should be on counter IED training.
D. Each district can prepare a training programme based on its local conditions. Resource persons and best trainers should be shortlisted much in advance and deployed for this purpose.
E. Training should include initial briefing at holding areas followed by field training at the area of deployment. Training program should essentially focus upon the precautions to be taken, SOPs to be followed, to know the area where they are going to be deployed. Training sessions should be more of briefing sessions. Weapon training or GPS training in that short time and with very limited infrastructure for force under transit is not practical. By the time companies arrive in the district, campaigning already comes to full swing and force requirement gets multi folded for ROP, helipad area domination and bandobast duties on daily basis
F. Training should be ideally imparted at coy clusters to rationalize on scarce training resources.
G. Dos & Don’ts and area specific information brochure should be prepared in advance and made available to each force on its arrival. Trainers to be deputed from training institutes.
H. Apart from training, proper and regular briefings should be ensured by the state authorities.
I. Similarly, it is to be noted that, familiarization of incoming forces should be done by local troops: This is essential for the incoming force to get familiarized with the area. Once polling booth wise deployment plan is finalized, incoming deployed force can dominate the area surrounding the particular booth which helps in securing the area as well as boosting the confidence of incoming force for poll day duty.
10.6 Helicopter Operation:
The demand of Helicopters of make and type should be worked out in advance, based on actual field requirements and availability of secured helipads. The proposal should reach the office of CEO at least one month prior to the polling day. Trial landings if required should be carried out at least 15 days in advance so that necessary modifications in helipads can be completed in time. Requisition of sorties for induction/de-induction of EVMs/troops should reach the office of Nodal officer police at least 10 days prior to the polling day so that efficient planning and allocation of resources can be achieved. All DEOs/SPs should ensure that the Standard Operating Procedure already made available to their office should be strictly followed.
10.7 Inter-State/Inter-Agency Coordination:
Border meetings at the level of SP/DIG/IG should be held at least 3 months in advance with the bordering states. State intelligence apparatus should be geared up for effective intelligence collection, surveillance and sharing for the benefit of all the stakeholders/ sister agencies. Focus areas of cooperation (QRTs, CAS EVAC, border sealing, domination of border areas, logistics support, etc.) should be identified, documented, and shared. Similarly, state level coordination meetings with the bordering states should also be conducted well in advance. Inter-Agency coordination structures should also be set up to ensure smooth delivery of election.
10.8 Establishment Issues:
The performance of an officer in LWE/Insurgency/Militancy areas grossly depends on his acquaintance with domain knowledge, kind of extremist’s outfits and friendly forces operating in that area. Therefore, transfer and postings in such areas should be affected at least 6 months prior to the imposition of MCC. The age profile also should be kept in mind at the time of postings. Similar exercise should be followed for CAPFs.
10.9 Welfare of Forces:
Provision for, cashless medical treatment, casevac, Air ambulance support arrangements for Covid-19 Infra and medicines etc (If required). etc. for all men (Security and election/polling duty personnel) on election duty should be ensured. These arrangements should be made available right from the arrival of election bound forces/staff till final de-induction.
A. Enhancement of medical facilities in these areas with deployment of more doctors from other parts of the state should also be ensured.
B. Essential medicines to be kept in sufficient quantity at centralized holding area so that requisite dose is administered to everyone under supervision of the medical officer of local unit.
C. Arrangement with Hospitals for Cashless Treatment Specially for super specialty treatment should be given in advance so that there is no confusion about where the patient is required to be taken after medical evacuation. D. Distribution of food packets should be planned in advance.
E. All the departments of the state government at the district level should be instructed to facilitate the forces from their side for the smooth conduct of elections.
F. It has been often brought to notice that the forces deployed are not distributed honorarium as per instructions of the commission. It will be desirable that the nominal rolls of all the forces should be acquired before the dispatch of the polling parties so that the exact amount is disbursed in time.
10.10 Instructions for other Departments of State Government:
Role of all the other departments viz., education, forest, Police/Home Guard, Gram Panchayat, Revenue, etc. should be clearly defined at the highest level. Checklist for each department should be communicated in advance so that it gets communicated to their respective field formations in advance. For example, the responsibilities of various departments can be clarified as under;
A. Education: provide infrastructure and support for stay of additional forces and act as facilitators for the incoming force.
B. Magistracy: VIP visits and bandobast arrangements for public rallies should not be left to the political parties citing code of conduct. Security cannot be compromised. Support from PWD, Health and Forest department is required for making requisite security arrangements. DM/SDMs have to play proactive role in it.
C. Health: District hospital/CHCs/PHCs are to play proactive role by making visits to security camps as health facilities available at many deployment locations are non-existent. Supply of medicines and malaria kits should be ample. Special arrangements for Covid 19, in case required.
D. Food and civil supplies: Department should ensure sufficient stock of essential food items and LPG.
10.11 Force Movement/Role of Ministry of Railways:
A. Forces should inform the office of Force Coordinator and Nodal Officer before start of journey.
B. Movement plan of forces should be worked out by MHA much in advance, based on which timely placement of special trains and separate coaches can be planned by Railway authorities.
C. Demand for on board meals can also be projected to IRCTC.
D. Train bookings to be done based on destination, deployment, and deboarding stations.
E. The scale of passenger bogies should not be less than 2 sleeper class bogies per Coy, and 1 Bogie for TAC HQ.
F. Minimum 2 - AC III tier coaches per special train must be provided.
G. There should be appropriate coordination between Railways and IRCTC, especially whenever the special trains are delayed for whatever reasons, for supply of meals to the troops at appropriate times and place.
H. Railway stations have limited capacity to handle special trains in a day.
Special trains should be diverted to satellite railway stations. These should be clarified before the start of journey.
I. Railways to play a crucial role in planning & monitoring of smooth & timely movement of these special trains.
J. Issue of providing sufficient number of special trains need to be properly planned beforehand especially during de-induction.
K. Railways needs to accord priority to Election special trains, so as to avoid wastage of precious man hours of forces.
L. A senior officer from Railway may be nominated as nodal officer for immediate resolution of problems specially during movement of Election special trains.
10.12 Communication Plan:
A. In Maoist areas communication, being the lifeline, it should be accorded TOP PRIORITY.
B. In order to achieve this, a joint command and control centre, as far as possible, connected to the remotest polling booth should be established; so that timely information of incidents can be shared with ECI/MHA and all other stakeholders.
C. Polling booths lying in communication (mobile/HF/VHF) shadow area should be identified and such areas should be provided with satellite communication.
D. Forces to be advised to carry sufficient number of communication equipment both HF & VHF to remain connected even up to half section deployments. E. Satellite phones should be also mobilized in sufficient numbers by MHA.
F. Each Coy of CAPF should be provided with local mobile phone SIM wherever required for communication with local police authority, if the existing SIM of the Coy is not working in the deployed area and they should be provided with adequate recharge vouchers for recharging of their phone.
G. A detailed Communication plan, with all polling parties/ polling stations should be worked out in advance.
10.13 Transport/Logistics/Equipments:
A. State authorities should ensure that road worthy transport as per the laid guidelines should be provided to the troops at deboarding stations to further places of deployment.
B. These vehicles should have full fuel tank and be made available to the Coys at Railway Stations.
C. Spare vehicles to be arranged enroute to handle contingencies.
D. A pool of mechanically sound vehicles and multiple fuel distribution centres should be identified/created.
E. States should identify/create multiple refuelling stations in districts where a large a number Coys are deployed.
F. A spare driver and an automobile mechanic along with frequently used spare parts with each Coy will prove to be useful.
G. For night domination and road security sufficient night goggles, NVD, Monocular with cells along-with sufficient motor cycles should be provided to deployed units.
H. For effective utilization of the troops, timely accommodation, and other logistics as per laid provisions should be provided.
10.14 EVM Guarding:
One Coy of CAPF should be provisioned for polled EVM Guarding. CCTV coverage should also be ensured.
10.15 Information Sharing Protocol:
Password protected online documents sharing system can be put in place for prompt dissemination of information to the field and higher formations.
10.16 Coordinating Role of MHA:
A. MHA should issue detailed instructions to all the respective forces with regard to carrying of requisite arms/ammunitions, communication equipment, medicines, dispatching of young detachments, keeping age profile in mind, etc.
B. Incoming troops to be properly equipped with area weapons and special equipment as per the ground realities of Maoist (example Bastar region). In Chhattisgarh Assembly elections for example, CISF/RPF/SAP troops were carrying pistol/carbines which are not suitable for Bastar.
C. Instruction should also be issued by MHA much in advance, to respective forces to get BD Squads, requisite weapon/Ammunitions /accoutrements/ wireless/satellite phone etc. In Chhattisgarh State for example, terrain is very critical and effective weapon is of high trajectory like-Mortar, Rifle grenade and UBGL.
10.17 Effective Use of Modern Technology:
A. Use of GPS devices to track Polling/Security movement.
B. HAM radios
C. Use of Vehicle mounted mobile towers.
D. Use of DSPT (satellite phones)
E. Use of Drones
10.18 Transparency Measures:
A. 100% webcasting/videography (in case of non-availability of network) of all relocated booths and remote areas booths. B. Deployment of Static magistrates
C. Deployment of Micro observers.
D. Effective use of sector magistrates.
E. EVM storage security measures to be publicized.
F. Use of Signage in local languages at polling booths.
10.19 Other Instructions:
A. Deployment locations and setting up of additional security camps should be planned by the DEO/SP much in advance but without making it public.
B. Force deployed at each polling station should have its temporary defences prepared to prevent bold attacks and long-distance sniper fire. Frisking at polling booths to be done as per threat perception.
C. Coordination of polling party with security personnel should be minutely planned.
D. Change in Poll Timing should be planned much earlier.
E. Detailed instructions should be issued for night halt for EVM parties. Early dispatch/night stay report should reach in time. Nodal officer of such parties to stay in the camp.
F. The time of dispatch of Polling parties by various means (foot /by Helicopter/ vehicle) should be decided much in advance and communicated to the CEO.
CHAPTER 11 ELECTORAL REGISTRATION OF THE FORCES AND POSTAL BALLOTS
11.1 Introduction
During elections and particularly on poll day, invariably the state police forces including SAP and CAPF are on duty and hence are unable to cast their votes. To ensure that they do not miss out on their franchise right, the law provides for postal ballots for security forces as well as for the armed forces, who are almost always on the move. The Armed forces of the Union including the Army, Navy and Air force, though not always connected with each election, are known to be deployed in certain specific situations, such as for airlifting personnel, or for transporting election functionaries over water. They are also deployed in sensitive areas in greater strength during elections.
11.2 Categories
The security forces are placed in two categories for availing of postal ballots as follows:
A. Members of the Armed Forces of the Union, CAPF and SAP serving outside their state can register as Service Voters for availing of postal ballots or can vote by Proxy as a Classified Service Voter. They can also be registered as General Voters in Peace Stations.
B. Members of the state police and SAP posted within their own state can only be registered as General Electors. As soon as the elections are declared, they are considered as “Electors on Election Duty”, defined as – Persons and Staff who are specifically assigned any official work in connection with elections on the day of poll & cannot be able to vote at normal PS. These include all police personnel (except those on leave).
As general electors they have two options for casting their votes:
(i) They can avail of Postal Ballots as per provisions of RP Act, if they are appointed on election duty in a constituency different from the one where they are registered as electors.
(ii) For those state police personnel on election duty in the same constituency where they are registered, they can vote at any allocated Polling Station on poll day for which the RO has issued them an Election Duty Certificate.
A summary of actions both the categories, that is, Service Electors and police personnel registered as General Electors, how they can register and how they should vote is given below:
11.3 For Quick Understanding-Service Voter: A. Who is categorized as a Service Elector:
a) Being a member of the Armed Forces of the Union; or
b) Being a member of a force to which provisions of the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), have been made applicable whether with ot without modification.; or
c) Being a member of an Armed Police Force of a State, and serving outside that State; or
d) Being a person who is employed under the Government of India, in a post outside India In
e) Spouse of a service voter belonging to any of the four categories mentioned above and ordinarily residing with him/her is also eligible to be registered in the last part of electoral roll as an elector along with service voter.
Remember
(i) Spouse will be enrolled as a service voter on the basis of declaration made by Service Voter in the prescribed form; no separate declaration is required to be made by the Spouse.
(ii) While spouse can be enrolled as Service Voter, an adult son / daughter cannot be enrolled as Service Voter.
(iii) Alternatively, a service voter can also opt to enroll as General Elector at place of posting, if it is a peace station, and its status has accordingly been informed to the ECI.
(iv) No person can be enrolled on more than one electoral roll. Every service personnel has to submit a declaration while registering as a service voter, that s/he is not enrolled as a general elector.
What are the methods through which a Service Personnel can vote?
a) Through Postal Ballot Paper on being registered as Service Voter/ Elector except proxy voters.
b) Through Proxy; Proxy is to be appointed by Service Electors themselves (Such electors are known as Classified Service Voters).
c) By becoming a General Elector and casting vote at the nearest allocated Polling Station (only for personnel of the state police and armed forces personnel posted in Peace Stations).
Can Service Electors be enrolled in Electoral Rolls at two places – Service Voters roll and as a general elector?
11.3.1.1 No.
11.3.1.2 It is an offence under Section 131 of Representation of People’s
Act-1950
B. How to become a Service Voter
a) Find out the name of your Constituency and Part in the district/state of permanent residence
b) Fill relevant Form 2/2A
c) Form 2 to be filled by members of the armed forces of the union and their spouse.
d) Form 2A to be filled by State Armed Police: Statement as to place of ordinary residence by a member of the Central Armed Police Force, or State Armed Police who is serving outside the State
e) The name of service Voter will appear on the last part of electoral roll of your constituency.
f) A service personnel can become a Classified Service voter CSV, that is, vote by Proxy.
How to find your constituency
a) Go to the ECI website www.eci.nic.in, nvsp.in, or download voter helpline app
b) Click on relevant option on above websites or voter helpline APP
c) Select your State and District
d) You will get a drop-down list of Assembly Constituencies
To Whom Form 2A should be submitted?
a) Form-2A is to be handed over to in-charge of record office or commandant of state armed force.
b) The in-charge record officer/Commandant will verify the particulars written in the form and sign it and submitted online on service portal.
c) He will forward the Form 2A to the District Election Officer of the state concerned. Details of address, etc of all DEOs are given on ECI website as well as on concerned state’s CEO’s website.
d) It is the responsibility of the applying service voter to ensure that the
particulars mentioned in the form 2A are correct and perfect in all respects
e) Personnel registered as Service Voters are not issued an Electors Photo Identity Card or Voter ID card.
C. How can a Service personnel at a Peace Station enroll as a General Elector:
a) If any service person does not wish to be registered as service elector and is serving / posted at Peace Station, s/he has choice to get himself registered as general elector in the concerned polling station of the assembly constituency in which the actual/present place of his residence is situated. It is reiterated that it is essential that such an applicant should be serving at a peace station to get enrolled there as a General Voter
b) Fill Form-6 for registration along with requisite documents (see list below)
c) Form-6 can be filled online also by going to www.eci.gov.in, nvsp.in, https://voters.eci.gov.in and through voter helpline app.
d) You will receive EPIC (Elector Photo Identity Card) through speed post.
e) Form–6 is to be filled up and submitted only to concerned Electoral Registration Officer or ERO.
f) You can vote at the polling station physically if you are a general elector
(i) Check your name on the electoral roll ahead of elections
(ii) Only those whose names appear on electoral roll can cast their vote
g) If a service person has opted to get enrolled as general elector, s/he should not get enrolled as a service elector
h) Along with Form-6, Proof of Date of Birth and Proof of Residence is to be submitted.
Can the Member of Armed Forces of Union in a Peace Station/Armed Police Force vote at the Polling station located in the area where they reside due to their present posting?
a) Yes. As already mentioned earlier, these persons can get their names enrolled in the Electoral Roll as General Electors of the place where they reside due to their present posting, as detailed above.
b) They have to submit Forms-6 to the concerned Electoral Registration Officer as mentioned above.
c) The Electoral Registration Officer will enroll the name of the persons in the Electoral Roll as General Elector after following the procedure prescribed.
D. Alternatively a Service Voter can opt for voting through Proxy
a) The Service Electors who have appointed Proxy are known as Classified Service Electors
b) For appointing a Proxy, fill Form 13F before the CO (Commanding Officer) and send it to proxy for his/ her signature before a Notary/ First Class Magistrate
c) Proxy can submit the Form to the Returning Officer (RO) concerned
d) Proxy should be ANY ordinary resident of that constituency; need not be a registered voter, but must not be disqualified to be registered as a voter
e) Application for appointment of a proxy should be received by the RO before the last date of filing of nomination papers
f) If the service personnel who is the applicant for proxy is at his/her native place, both the applicant and proxy can sign Form 13 F before a Notary / First Class Magistrate and send to the RO
What is the procedure for casting vote through Proxy?
The proxy can vote through Electronic Voting Machine by remaining physically present at the Polling Station located at the native place of the Service Elector in the same manner as any other Electors assigned to that polling station record their votes.
How long is the appointment of proxy valid and what is the procedure for revocation of appointment of Proxy?
a) Once appointed, the proxy will continue until his/her appointment is revoked by the service voter
b) So proxy will continue as long as the Service Elector continues to be Service Elector or till the date the Service Elector (Classified Service Voter) revokes the appointment of the Proxy or till the death of the proxy.
c) The Service Elector should intimate the revocation of appointment of proxy, and name of the substitute to the Returning Officer in Form 13-G.
E. Summary of Steps shown above that is to be followed by service voters for enrolment in service electors roll –
a) The Commission sends a communique every year to Ministry of Defence (MoD), Ministry of Home Affairs, and Directorate General of Border Roads to intimate the commencement of summary revision of service electors
b) Eligible Service Personnel fills up Form 2/2A, for their enrolment as per provision of amended Registration of the Electors Rules,1960
c) Service Personnel send these Forms 2/2A in duplicate along with declaration to the concerned Record Office / Authorities declared as Nodal by their Force for this purpose.
F. Steps to be taken for preparation of Service Voters List by Record Office/
Nodal Officer of CAPF/SAP
a) The officer in charge of each Record Office/ Nodal officer for CAPF or SAP will check the statement submitted by each service elector and ensure that the particulars given are complete and correct.
b) S/he will also ensure that full address has been mentioned including the details of the district and hometown / village.
c) After careful verification, the Record Officer/Nodal should sign the verification certificate provided in the form
d) The Record Office / Nodal/Authorities shall now send these Forms along with declaration to the respective District Election Officer.
e) In case of Union Territories, NCT of Delhi these shall be forwarded to the Chief Electoral Officers of the Union Territories.
f) While forwarding the forms and declaration a covering list showing the particulars of the statements being forwarded should also be enclosed
g) The Record Offices / Authorities should not send the forms and declarations to Election Commission of India under any circumstances.
G. Steps to be taken for preparation of Service Voters List at CEO / DEO /
ERO level
a) Forms shall be received online on service voter portal www. servicevoter.eci.nic.in through record offices / commandants.
b) District Election Officer (DEO) shall send it to the concerned Electoral Registration Officer
c) Concerned ERO will process the forms online.
d) Concerned Electoral Registration Officer shall prepare the drafts of the last part of the electoral roll
e) Final publication of the last part of the electoral roll by the ERO shall be done and list communicated to the Record Offices / Nodal/ Authorities and published on CEO’s website in image PDF format. H. When does status as Service Elector cease?
a) On the date of retirement of the Service Elector from the Armed Forces / Armed Police Forces, the status ceases for both the personnel and his / her spouse.
b) In case of death of the Service Electors, the status ceases for both the personnel and his / her spouse.
I. Whether votes polled by Service Electors through Postal Ballot Paper are taken in the account during counting?
a) Yes. Absolutely.
b) The counting of votes begins only with the counting of Postal Ballot Paper.
c) In fact, the Returning Officer counts the Postal Ballot Paper by own self or through AROs appointed for this purpose on his/her table.
J. What is the procedure of counting of votes polled by Service Electors through Postal Ballot Paper.
a) All the Postal Ballot Paper of Service Electors received before the time fixed for the commencement of counting of votes are taken into account.
b) First of all, the cover containing declaration in Form-13/A by the Service Elector is opened by the Returning Officer
c) He verifies whether the declaration is signed by the Service Elector and is attested by the competent authority.
d) But those Postal Ballot Papers received without prescribed declaration/ not marked properly are not taken into account in counting of votes.
e) The Postal Ballot Papers received after the time fixed for the commencement of counting are also not considered.
K. How can State police personnel become General Electors
a) They can apply online on ECI website www.eci.nic.in Voter Helpline App or www.nvsp.in or https://voters.eci.gov.in by Filling up Form-6; or fill up a physical Form-6.
b) To know details of where to get physical Form go to the ECI website www.eci.nic.in; or call up toll free Helpline number 1950 during working hours to know the details.
c) It must be ensured that the Assembly Constituency name is correctly filled in the Form. For knowing correct AC - click on Know your BLO and Polling Station button on the right column on the website, select your State and District, you will get a drop-down list of Assembly Constituencies
d) Such electors on registration will receive EPIC (Elector Photo Identity Card)
e) Form – 6 is to be filled up and submitted only to concerned ERO.
f) You can vote at the polling station physically if you are a general elector• Check your name on the electoral roll ahead of elections
- Only those whose names appear on electoral roll can cast their vote
g) If a service person having opted to get enrolled as general elector, he should not get enrolled as a service elector
List of documents required for applying for registration as General Elector:
The following documents are necessary for attaching with Form on filling up Form-6 for Inclusion of name in electoral roll as general electors, along with a declaration in the prescribed format, which is given below:
(i) Proof of Date of Birth: (Any one of these)
a. Birth certificate issued by Competent Local Body/ Municipal Authority/ Registrar of Births & Deaths
b. Aadhaar Card
c. PAN Card
d. Driving License
e. Certificate of Class X or Class XII issued by CBSE/ICSE/State Education Boards, if it contains Date of Birth
f. Any other document for proof of Date of Birth
(ii) Proof of Residence: (Any one of these)
a. Water/Electricity/Gas connection Bill for that address (at least one year)
b. Aadhaar card
c. Current passbook of Nationalized /scheduled Bank/ Post Office
d. Indian Passport
e. Revenue Department’s Land-Owning records including Kisan Bahi
f. Registered Rent Lease Deed (In case of tenant)
g. Registered Sale Deed (In case of own house)
h. Any other document for proof of residence
L. What is the procedure for casting vote through Postal Ballot by Service Voter?
a) The Returning Officer of the constituency in which the name of Service Elector is enrolled will send the Postal Ballot paper online electronically through ETPBS (Electronically Transmitted Postal Ballot System) ETPB contains: -
(i) List of content page
(ii) Postal Ballot Paper
(iii) Form 13A – declaration by elector
(iv) Form 13 B- Cover A(Inner envelope)
(v) Form 13 C- Cover B (outer envelope)
(vi) Form 13 D- Instructions for the Guidance of elector.
b) Service Electors should read carefully the instructions contained in the Form- 13D.
c) Record your vote by placing clearly a mark opposite the name of the candidate of your choice on the ballot paper; Your vote will be invalid if the mark does not clearly indicate your choice.
d) Do not put your signature, any word, sign or any other mark on the ballot paper other than the mark required to record your vote
e) After recording your vote on the ballot paper, place the ballot paper in the smaller cover marked ‘B’ sent; close the cover and secure it by seal or otherwise
f) Sign the declaration in Form 13A in the presence an officer appointed by the Commanding Officer of the Unit, ship or establishment and get attested by competent officer.
g) The officer will attest your signature and return the declaration to you; you must not show your ballot paper to the attesting officer nor tell him how you have voted.
h) It has to be ensured that the serial number of the postal ballot paper is as mentioned on the cover of 13B is entered at the assigned place in the declaration (13A).
i) Place the Declaration and also the smaller cover marked ‘B’ containing the ballot paper in the larger (Outer) cover marked ‘C’. Give your full signature in the space provided on the cover marked `B’. Close the larger cover (13C) and send it to the returning officer by post as to reach him latest before the commencement of the counting of votes.
j) Please remember that you have only one vote. Accordingly you should not vote for more than one candidate
k) No postage stamp need be affixed by you. You must ensure that the cover reaches the Returning Officer before the specified date by speed post.
11.4 Legal Provisions regarding Postal Ballots and their Execution Procedure:
Activities for undertaking electoral registration of the forces and Postal Ballots: A. Identify voters who are entitled to vote by post :
a) Service Voters (including their spouse) - (except those who opted for proxy voting)
b) Electors on election duty – Persons and Staff who are specifically assigned any official work in connection with elections on the day of poll & cannot be able to vote at normal PS. These include all police personnel (except those on leave), HGs, DEOs/ROs/AROs & their Staff, Control Room Staff, Videographers/Staff of EEM Teams/ ZOs/SOs, BLO, MOs, Drivers/Cleaners, etc. also.
B. Ensure uniform common design of postal ballot papers - Design of Postal Ballots for all categories shall be common.
C. Ensure smooth Management of PBs for Persons on Election Duty
D. Postal Ballot Matrix –


E. Explanation of Various Important Forms –
SNO. FORMS PURPOSE FURTHER EXPLANATION
1 Form 2 For the members of the Armed Forces and their spouse to enroll as ‘Service Electors’ It has to be submitted in two copies duly filled in, and is to be sent to the Record Officer or the authority concerned along with declaration Form. Record officers/ Authorities concerned shall forward duly verified forms online to the D.E.O./ERO of the concerned district /assembly of the state. After due process, the Electoral Registration Officer (E.R.O.) shall online enroll their names as ‘service voters’ in the last part of the electoral roll of the Assembly Constituency.
2 Form 2A For the members of the Armed Police
Forces of a State, who are posted outside their State. -As above-
3 Form 12 Letter of intimation to R.O.
(Application for
Postal Ballot Paper) This format is signed by personnel deployed on election duties, and submitted to RO. This form is nothing but a formal request for casting vote by PB. (The personnel appointed for election duty outside the constituency where they are registered as electors will be eligible for voting through PB.)
4 Form 12-A Application for
Election Duty
Certificate If a person is appointed on election duty within the Assembly Constituency in which s/he is enrolled as elector, then they have to submit this form to obtain EDC, for exercising his/her franchise in person. On getting EDC, one can exercise his/her franchise at the polling station where he/she is deployed on poll duty.
5 Form 12-B Election Duty certificate This is issued by the Returning Officer based on Form 12-A.
Those posted within the assembly constituency will be eligible for voting on the basis of ”EDC”
SNO. FORMS PURPOSE FURTHER EXPLANATION
6 Form 13 A Declaration by the service elector Service elector shall sign the declaration in this form, and get it attested by the competent officer before submitting it along with his/her PB.
7 Form-13-B A cover containing the
PB The Postal Ballot is placed in this cover and sealed by the Service Voter.
8 Form-13-C A large cover addressed to the
Returning Officer Next the cover containing Form-13-B and declaration made in Form-13-A are placed in this cover and sealed.
9 Form13-D Instruction for guidelines of electors It contains point-wise instruction as to how the postal voting is to be done.
F. Appointment of Nodal Officers for Postal BallotTo handle various issues related to postal ballots, several nodal officers are required to be appointed –
a) At CEO office at State level.
b) At DGP office for State level, preferably not below the rank of IG.
c) At DEO and SP office at District level, preferably not below the rank of Dy Collector/DySP.
d) At AC level preferably not below the rank of Tehsildar/PI.
e) At every Police Force/Organization level such as in Home Guards, SAP, BWHG, etc.
f) At Postal Department, at State and District level.
G. Preparation of Databasea) Database of Police personnel, whether they are to be deployed in poll duty or not, should be prepared.
b) Database of Home Guards to be put on poll duty should also be prepared.
c) Along-with other information about No. & name of AC, No. & Name of PS, Sr. No. in Part where the person is enrolled and EPIC of each person should be captured in the database.
d) Cell phone number and email IDs, if any, of all persons shall be collected and stored in the database.
e) The software for preparation of this database shall be made available by
CEO.
f) The work of preparation of database should be completed about 3 months before election.
g) The database should be prepared preferably in Excel sheet. The database should contain address (office & residence) with PIN CODE, designation & basic salary details.
h) The database should also have fields for capturing information about No. & Name of AC, No. & Name of PS where the persons will be put on duty, the location of facilitation centres.
i) The facilitation centre and training centre will be same. If a person is to be called for training more than once, information about all the trainings should be captured in the database.
j) The database of CAPF/Armed Forces to be deployed has to be prepared by the authorities of the concerned force itself. It will be their duty to inform the concerned RO about the details of deployment, and the manner/address in which the PB shall be received by the individual force members.
H. Checking of the Enrolment Status of Person in the Database:
Details of Enrolment of a person who is a registered as a general elector can be found by using search facility provided on ECI website or concerned state’s CEO’s website based on EPIC/Name/Locality for State Police or through Voter Helpline App or www.nvsp.in or https://voters.eci.gov.in.
However, for Service Voters, this system is not applicable. The Structure of
List of Service Voters in Electoral Roll is as under: -
a) List of Service Voters is prepared separately for each Assembly Constituency.
b) The Service Voters are registered at the end of the Electoral Roll in a separate ‘last’ Part.
c) They do not have specified Polling Stations allocated against their names as they are all listed together in one list for each AC, irrespective of their place of residence.
d) ‘Last’ Part which contains list of Service Voters is prepared in English and has three Sub-Parts.
▪ ‘A’ –for Armed forces
▪ ‘B’ –for Armed Police Force of States
▪ ‘C’ –for persons employed under Government of India posted outside India
- “Nil” Electoral Roll for each sub-part is prepared if no Service Voter is present in all the sub-parts in any given Constituency.
- For finding out details of whether his/her application for registering as a Service Voter has been accepted, the only recourse that the service personnel has is to check from the rolls made available to the Record Office/concerned authorities every year by the Returning Officers. This system is in position in the interest of confidentiality.
I. Corrections in Electoral Roll Entriesa) Based on search, if any correction in roll becomes necessary, appropriate forms should be filled and correction be made following due procedure.
b) In case person is not enrolled at all or enrolled at a place other than ordinarily residence, ERO should take immediate steps for enrolment at the place of ordinarily residence.
c) DEO should monitor this on a daily basis.
d) It should be made clear to Govt. employees, by a circular, that enrollment at more than one place is an offence, and that a person is to be enrolled only at the place of ordinarily resident and not at native place.
J. Postal Ballot for Police Personnel on election duty-
a) All police force from Constable to DGP are notified under Sec.28A of
R. P. Act, 1951 as on deputation to ECI during election period.
b) On the basis of judgment of Hon’ble Madras High Court dated 22.08.2012 all police personnel, except those on leave during the election period, are treated as personnel on election duty and hence entitled to vote by Postal Ballot.
K. Form 12 - Distribution of Pre-filled Forms and Collection of Signed
Forms–
a) The SP should prepare the database of all police personnel (including home guards, to be deployed on election duty).
b) Enrolment status of all police personnel to be collected in the database.
c) Pre-filled Form-12 shall be delivered to the police personnel along with his duty order or by any other means at least 15 days before the poll.
d) Police personnel have to submit Form-12 for availing the facility of PB, so as to reach RO at least 7 days or such shorter period as the RO may allow before poll. (u/r 20(1)).
e) SP/Nodal officer of Police shall arrange to collect duly filled-in & signed Form-12 from police personnel at least one week before poll. This can be combined with training of police officer on poll duty.
f) SP should organize a special facilitation camp for police officers for casting PBs.
g) One Gazetted officer for attestation of Declaration in Form-13A at Facilitation Camp.
h) Register for correct account of PBs issued.
i) A ballot box shall be kept at the facilitation centre and police officers who have been issued PB should deposit PB in this box after marking.
j) A note should be printed at the bottom of Form-12, that the employee should check it and make corrections, if any.
k) Form-12 should be distributed to police personnel through the SP.
L. Issue of Postal Ballotsa) The RO should prepare PBs for all police personnel in anticipation of receiving filled-in Form 12 duly signed.
b) RO shall depute one Officer to deliver prepared PBs to Police personnel.
c) Prepared PBs should be given to this officer in advance so that PBs can be delivered as soon as duly signed & filled-in Form 12 received from police personnel.
d) The officer will issue PBs after verifying identity of voter concerned based on EPIC or any other photo ID.
e) Employees are generally not sent for election duty outside their district. If, however it becomes necessary to send a PB to a Facilitation Centre outside the district the DEO will coordinate with the DEO of the other district.
M. Procedure at the Facilitation Centre (FC) for Police and other Security Forces–
A large number of police officers, Home Guards (HG), Village Defence Force (VDF), Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) and State Armed Police Forces (SAPF) are deployed for making security arrangements for the elections. The security personnel so deployed on election duty have two options; (i) avail postal ballots as per the provisions of the Representation of People’s Act, 1952, if they are appointed on election duty in a constituency different from the one where they are registered as electors (ii) avail Election Duty Certificate (EDC), if they are deployed on election duty in the same constituency where they are registered as voters. There is a provision for postal ballots for voters on election duty and service voter (which includes Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) and State Armed Police Forces (SAPF) including members of such forces serving outside the state. The Election Commission of India, New Delhi has issued detailed guidelines in the Handbook for Returning Officer (Document 23-Edition 2-August 2022). The voters on election duty include Police, Home Guards (HG), Village Defence Force (VDF), State Armed Police Forces (SAPF) and any other force or volunteers deployed for making security arrangements for the elections.
a) Appointment of Nodal Officer (Postal Ballot): A police officer of the rank of Superintendent of Police and above in the State Police Headquarters should be appointed as Nodal Officer (Postal Ballot). He should get a Single Point of Contact (SPOC) appointed in all the Districts, Battalions of State Armed Police Force (SAPF), Home Guard Units and Village Defence Force (VDF) Units. He should compile details such as name of the officer, EPIC number, Name of the Assembly Constituency (AC)/Parliamentary Constituency (PC), serial number and part number of the voter list etc. of each of the officer and prepare a database with the help of Single Point of Contact (SPOC). The officers who don’t have EPIC should fill up Form No.6 for obtaining EPIC numbers.
b) Application for Postal Ballots: The Single Point of Contact (SPOC) should fill up information for the issue of Form No. 12 in the name of officers requiring Postal Ballots on Electoral Roll Management System (ERMS) and submit it to the jurisdictional Returning Officers (RO) within 5 days from the issue of notification. The Returning Officer (RO) will verify the information and issue Form No.12 to the Single Point of Contact (SPOC) and the same is to be filled up, signed by individual officers and forwarded to the jurisdictional Returning Officer (RO) along with a copy of the EPIC. The Returning Officer (RO) will issue Postal Ballots in the name of individual officers after the finalisation of candidates and delivers it to the Single Point of Contact (SPOC) in bulk.
c) Facilitation Center for Postal Ballots: The Postal Ballots of the Police, Home Guards (HG) and members of other forces do not reach the Returning Officer (RO) in time for counting. Therefore, to prevent such in conveniences,
Single Point of Contact (SPOC) are responsible for organising Facilitation Center for Postal Ballots for officers who are registered voters in the Assembly Constituency (AC)/Parliamentary Constituency (PC) falling within the jurisdiction of the Districts concerned. A suitable venue and date to be worked out by the Single Point of Contact (SPOC), Superintendent of Police and Commissioner of Police in consultation with the Returning Officer (RO). The members of Police, Home Guards (HG), Village Defence Force (VDF), State Armed Police Forces (SAPF) and any other force or volunteers to be deployed for making security arrangements for the elections are to be called to the venue on the scheduled date for training and casting of vote through Postal Ballot should be facilitated on the same day. The Returning Officers (RO) of various Assembly Constituency (AC)/Parliamentary Constituency (PC) falling within the jurisdiction of the Districts depute their representatives along with Ballot Boxes. The candidates of various political parties are to be informed in advance so that they can appoint their agents for witnessing the process to make all the stakeholders participate in the process to ensure transparency and fair play. The Single Point of Contact (SPOC) should arrange for issue of Postal Ballots to individual officers after verifying EPIC and making entry in the Postal Ballot Register. A gazetted officer should be posted at the Postal Ballot Facilitation Center for the attestation of declaration in Form No.13A and identification of the voter based on his identity documents. The Ballot Boxes should be kept in a room and arrangement should be made voting compartment to ensure secrecy of the ballot. The officers should be made to stand in queue and place the casted Postal Ballot cast in Form No.13B and enclose both the Forms in Form No.13C and place it in the Ballot Box by turn. The entire process is to be video graphed. A register in the following format should be maintained at the Facilitation Center:
