1. BACKGROUND
1. Different democracies have different types of Election Observation. The Election Observation includes the observation by domestic Observers as well as Observers by external agencies such as United Nations, Commonwealth, and other external election watch groups and so on. However, in the Indian context, the election Observation has always been a domestic initiative. The concept of election observation by the domestic Observers itself has been evolved over a period of time, as the complaints during the election process were far and few in the initial years. There was no concept of deputing Election Observers from one State to another State. Initially, as and when complaints were received, some officials from the Election Commission’s headquarters were deputed. Over a period of time the number of complaints gradually increased, however, the deputation of Election Commission’s officials had a serious limitation.
2. Commission started deputing some senior officials from the same State to observe election process in a constituency or a group of constituencies. But the concept of deputing senior officers as the Election Commission’s Observers took a firm root only from the beginning of the year 1990s. Over a period of nearly last two decades, the deputation of Election Observers from one State to another State has become an integral part of the election management in the country. Currently, mostly the officers who belong to All India Services and Central Services like IRS, CBDT and CBEC, IDES are being deputed as the election observers.
2. STATUTORY BASIS OF APPOINTMENT
1. Observers of the Election Commission of India are appointed under the powers conferred on it by Section 20B of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and the plenary powers available to the Commission under the Constitution of India. They are the appointees of the Commission working under the superintendence, control, and discipline of the Commission for the period from their appointment until the process of election is completed.
2. The Representation of the People Act, 1951 was amended in August, 1996 to add a new Section 20B. This provides statutory powers to the Observers to watch the conduct of elections and especially in respect of counting of votes.

3. Section 20B reads as follows: - “1 [20B. Observers.-
(1) The Election Commission may nominate an Observer who shall be an officer of Government to watch the conduct of election or elections in a constituent or a group of constituencies and to perform such other functions as may be entrusted to him by the Election Commission.
(2) The Observer nominated under sub-section (1) shall have the power to direct the returning officer for the constituent or for any of the constituencies for which he has been nominated, to stop the counting of votes at any time before the declaration of the result or not to declare the result if in the opinion of the Observer booth capturing has taken place at a large number of polling stations or at places fixed for the poll or counting of votes or any ballot papers used at a polling station or at a place fixed for the poll are unlawfully taken out of the custody of the returning officer or are accidentally or intentionally destroyed or lost or are damaged or tampered with to such an extent that the result of the poll at that polling station or place cannot be ascertained.

(3) Where an Observer has directed the Returning Officer under this section to stop counting of votes or not to declare the result, the Observer shall forthwith report the matter to the Election Commission and thereupon the Election Commission shall, after taking all material circumstances into account, issue appropriate directions under Section 58A. or Section 64A or Section 66.
Explanation. - For the purposes of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3), “Observer” shall include a Regional Commissioner or any such officer of the Election Commission as has been assigned under this section the duty of watching the conduct of election or elections in a constituent or group of constituencies by the Commission.
3. OVERVIEW OF OBSERVER’S DUTY
1. By dint of their seniority and long experience in the administrative services, General and Police Observers are expected to be in a position to assist the Commission in the conduct of free and fair polls.

2. They will also be able to oversee the efficient and effective management of the electoral process at the field level.

3. For all purposes, they will act as the eyes and ears of the Commission during the period of the election (and not the mouthpiece) and provide direct inputs to the Commission from the field as an interface with the election machinery the candidates, political parties, and electors to ensure that the Acts, rules, procedures, instructions, and guidelines related to elections are strictly and impartially complied with by all concerned.
4. Their inputs/observations are confidential and solely for the use of the Commission and not for any other agency including media. They must not, therefore, interact with or respond to the queries of the Press even after the elections are over.
5. It is clarified that while the formal report/input/observation sent by the Observers are meant for the use of the Commission, it does not mean that the observers will not discuss with the CEO/RO/DEO about their observation on various aspects of election management in order to facilitate midcourse corrections.
6. However, the Observers shall not mark copies of their formal reports to the Commission, to any other person including CEO/RO/DEO.
7. It should be kept in mind that the objective of the deputation of the Observer is not to find fault but to facilitate field administration in ensuring a free and fair poll.
4. BRIEFING OF OBSERVERS
The appointment of an officer as an Observer and the intimation for the briefing meeting shall be communicated by the ECI through the Chief Electoral Officer and nodal officer, if any, of the State and Central Government who shall coordinate with Election Commission for various issues including provision of list of officers for appointment as observers. No request for exemption shall be entertained for this meeting and any replacement should be done only with the permission of ECI. Replacement requests shall not be entertained without serious reasons.
5. TOURS AND ABSENCE FROM HEADQUARTERS
1. All Observers should seek prior permission from the Commission every time they want to leave the headquarters on personal work or on official work not connected with performance of their duties as Observers.
2. Request of permission for leave etc. by the undeployed/reserve General,
Police and Counting Observers is required be submitted to the Observer Planning Section and unless the Observer receives communication in writing from the Commission regarding approval of his/her temporary absence, leave etc., the permission shall not be deemed to have been accorded.
3. All requests for exemption from Observer duty should be routed through the Observers’ sponsoring authority. No exemption requests shall be deemed to have been accepted unless the Observer receive communication in writing from Commission that his/her exemption requests have been accepted by the Commission. The State/Ut-wise list of Zonal DEC/Secy concerned of the respective State/UT is available on the Observer Portal”
4. No Observer is allowed to go on a foreign trip during the period intervening between the briefing session and the completion of election process.
5. No requests in this regard should be made to the Commission. Only in case of receipt of late intimation about selection to attend a foreign training, which had been duly sponsored by the DOPT may recommend release of such officer by substituting an officer of equivalent or high rank.
6. All such requests shall be addressed by the respective Nodal Officers to the Commission.
6. REQUESTS FOR LEAVE BY DEPLOYED OBSERVERS
1. In case of deployed Observers, request(s) of permission for temporary absence, leave etc. by the General, Police and Counting Observers is required be submitted to the Zonal Deputy Election Commissioner/ Secretary concerned and the same will be processed by Zonal Division concerned for approval of Zonal DEC, who shall be the competent authority to approve the same. In all such cases, unless the Observer receives communication in writing from the Commission regarding approval of his/her temporary absence, leave etc., the permission shall not be deemed to have been accorded.
2. All correspondence in this regard shall be addressed to Deputy Election Commissioner (in charge of the State) by name.
7. OBSERVER PORTAL
1. A web portal has been made for observers. Link to the Observer Portal is given on the website of the Commission [ECI Home Page o Menu (Top left Corner o ECI OFFICIALS o Quick Links for ECI Officials o Observers’ Portal o Link to Observer Portal]
2. Observers have been communicated their user ID which is same as their ECI Code. They must change their password when they login for the first time.
3. Observer Portal is the best method of communication between Observers and the Commission.
4. All the latest instructions of the Commission are available on the portal.
Message for Observers are also given on the message board of the portal.
5. Observers should, therefore, check the portal frequently. Similarly, observers should send their reports to the Commission by uploading on the Observers Portal.

6. Observers may give their mobile no. on portal so that notifications may be sent to the mobile for timely action by Observers.

7. In case of any issues regarding login in the portal/ change in mobile no. / change in email id Observer can directly call on the helpline number given on the Observer Portal’s login page on working days during working hours.

8. ROLE OF OBSERVERS
1. Section 20B of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 has vested the Observers with some statutory powers. They are empowered to direct RO to stop counting or not to declare for the reasons specified in Section 20B.
Besides the above-mentioned statutory powers, they have got certain very important roles to play which include: -
a) Observing the processes of scrutiny of nominations and withdrawal of candidature by the RO, and Report back to the Commission promptly in case of any irregularity;
b) Examination of the video clipping of the nomination process as well as making proper investigation on the complaints received in connection with the process of nomination. Also, to examine the unresolved grievances by the candidate/ political parties about the allotment of symbols;
c) Effective monitoring of implementation of MCC and detecting cases of violation of the model code of conduct by watching the video clippings of various meetings and, if needed, even by visiting important rallies to get first hand input, enforcement of the defacement of property act, training of Micro-Observers and such other things;
d) Though checking the account of expenditure of the candidates is entrusted to Expenditure Observers, however, General Observer are also required to do so, in case of exigencies, if directed by the Commission.
e) Tracking dispatch of postal ballot papers to the service voters, ensuring the setting up of the facilitation counters for polling officials, police, and security personnel etc., in accordance with the recent guidelines of the Commission and sending specific report in this regard to the Commission.
f) Checking randomization software, reviewing the process of randomization of the polling personnel, obtaining report from the
DEO regarding first level randomization; and
g) Observing and regulating the counting process. Observer has to sign the round wise counting sheets as proof of his/her satisfaction. She/he can direct the Returning Officer to stop counting of votes or declaration of result, if she/he notices any irregularities and bring the matter to the notice of the Commission for further directions.
2. Apart from the direct executive role of the observer, as enlisted above, Observers are expected to observe and report on all the steps involved in election management. An illustrative list is as below:
A. Nominations, Scrutiny, Withdrawal and Symbol allotment
I. The General Observers are directed to reach the constituency one day
before the last day of nomination and thus does not observe the process of nomination in person, however, during the first visit they should get the video recording of the nomination process from the RO and see the recordings to get and overview of compliance of ECI Instructions and report major violations, if any, with specific reference to Commission’s instructions regarding number of people allowed to be present during Nominations.
II. Scrutiny is a quasi-judicial process and should be conducted by the RO without any outside influence. However, Observer can ensure that RO is aware of the latest instructions; he has the latest list of disqualified candidates and the latest symbol order.
The Observer should observe the scrutiny process and report glaring error to the Commission. The observer should send tabular information of all rejected cases with reasons thereof. Observers should, however, abstain from directing or advising the RO. Observer may remind RO that the scrutiny proceedings can be adjourned in case an opportunity is to be provided or if any legal provision needs to be examined that requires time.
III. Allotment of symbol is a process that is very technical and requires due
care. It should be ensured that RO is aware of the provision of issue of reserved symbols and free symbols. He should have the latest list of political parties and election symbols. Another important aspect to be kept in mind is the symbol concession orders issued by Commission. After allotment of symbols, the list of contesting candidates should be prepared in Form 7A.
B. Electoral Roll Related
I. It should be ensured the EPICs prepared during the last days are properly
distributed to the electors and are not left with some intermediary.
II. Although no deletions can be made from the roll, absentee and dead and
duplicate voters should still continue to be tracked and a separate list of such voters should be prepared Polling Station-wise that can be used on the day of Poll.
III. The last supplement is prepared after the date of withdrawal by manually
marking the mother roll and previous supplement based on the last supplement. This activity has to be closely observed and ensured that efforts have been made to avoid any mistakes at this stage.
IV. It should be ensured that the copies given to the candidates are exactly the
same as that which would be used on the poll day by the polling party. Observer should see the latest instructions of the Election Commission, dated 11.12.2013 on this matter.
C. Campaign Period
I. During the campaign period, General Observers should monitor the implementation of Model Code of Conduct (MCC) and measures to prevent occurrence of electoral offenses. In this regard, the Observers should bring lapse to the notice of DEO, CEO and report to the Commission, if required but abstain from any executive action on their part.
II. Meeting with candidates to explain the provisions of Model Code of Conduct and the instructions of Commission thereunder.
III. Observe various events like political meets, visits of star campaigners etc.
IV. Monitor the work done by teams constituted for enforcement of MCC. V. Monitor dummy candidates, surrogate advertisements, and paid news.
VI. Review video recordings of activities of those candidates for whom video
trailing has been resorted to.
D. Pre-Poll Election Management
I. Monitor preparation of dispatch of postal ballot papers to service voters
immediately after the preparation of list of contesting candidates i.e. Form 7-A.
II. The first randomization of the election staff is done before the Observers
arrive. The second and third randomization is, however, done in the presence of Observers.
III. First level of EVMs/VVPATs randomization is done before the arrival of
the Observer but the second level randomization is done in the presence of Observers.
IV. Training is an activity on which special emphasis should be provided. Observers should monitor that proper training is arranged for the election staff, especially with regard to recent instructions of EC and related to operation of EVMs/VVPATs.
V. Intermediate Storage and Movement of Reserve EVMs and VVPATs
(P-2/P-3 dispatch and P+1 arrival of polling parties)
- Ensure that a Govt. building has been earmarked at the cluster point for polling parties and EVMs & VVPATs.
- Ensure that locations of intermediate strong room have been informed to the all the contesting candidate in writing.
- Ensure that the contesting candidates/their agents have been informed about the date and time of opening of strong room in writing.
- Ensure that proper security arrangement has been made to guard the strong room and all EVMs & VVPATs provided to polling parties or Sector Officer/Zonal Magistrate are under cover of armed police at all times.
- Ensure that arrangement for videography has been made there.
VI. Monitor adherence to the instructions of the Commission regarding issue
of postal ballot papers to the polling staff and voting through them.
VII. Visit polling stations and monitor that all polling stations are visited by
election official for verification from fitness angle. Verify whether the list of polling stations is approved by the Commission and the assured minimum basic facilities have been provided.
VIII. Go through the exercise of Vulnerability mapping and identification of
critical booths and critical clusters done by the DEO/SP and finalize and list of critical polling stations and critical clusters.
IX. Discuss and approve the District Security Plan with the DEO and the SP
and review the law-and-order issue in general. Review the availability of CPF, SAF and District Police. Review the preventive measures taken by the law-and-order implementation machinery.
X. Review the Communication Plan and confirm dry runs.
XI. Review Control Room arrangement and complaint monitoring system.
XII. Training and placement of Micro Observers
XIII. Ensure that proper arrangements for dispatch have been made. The
dispatch should normally be on the day before the poll and any exception should have prior approval of the Commission.
XIV. Review counting arrangements.
E. Poll Day Management
I. Monitor placement of Sector Officers and Micro Observers.
II. Monitor conduct of mock polls and receipt of mock poll certificate in
prescribed format signed by PO. Review the polling stations with no or only one polling agent.
III. Review the pace of poll and percentage of polling at regular intervals.
IV. Keep track of occurrence of any special events during the poll day. V. Keep track of any delays or temporary suspension of poll.
VI. Report anything exceptional to the CEO and the Commission.
VII. Ensure that proper arrangements for receipt of polling staff and polling material are made. Every receiving team should be well equipped with a checklist of items to be received. Ensure that the non-statutory documents are not locked with the EVMs/VVPATs in that strong room.
VIII. Ensure that a “special counter” is setup for receipt of polling parties from
those polling stations where any special events has been reported and on receipt, proper documentation, along with the statement/report of the Presiding Officer, if required, is done.
IX. Ensure that proper arrangements for receipt of reserve EVMs/VVPATs and
non-functional mock poll replaced EVMs/VVPATs from Sector Officers immediately after completion of poll as per ECI instructions.
F. Post Poll
I. Scrutiny of documents relating to poll is an important analytical tool to
analyze proper conduct of elections and taking re-poll decision. Scrutiny is done for those polling stations that fall within the criteria as per Commission’s instructions in the presence of Observer on the next day of the poll.
II. Report to the Commission about the conduct of poll and requirement of repoll, if any.
G. Counting
I. Review the arrangements for counting made by the DEO.
II. The randomization of counting staff is done in the presence of Observer.
III. Monitor that the counting of postal ballot taken up before the EVMs but the EVM counting is not held up till the completion of postal ballot counting.
IV. The Observer has to ensure that the results as tabulated by the counting
staff and the additional counting staff, drawn from the central government establishment, tally.
V. Conduct random test for two EVMs in every round and take corrective
action as per the directions of ECI, in case any mistakes are found.
VI. Ensure that during the counting, round-wise results are announced as and
when they are finalized.
VII. Certify proper completion of counting process and allow RO to declare
results, if satisfied with the counting process.
VIII. Report cases of recount to the Commission.

9. REPORTS BY OBSERVERS (ANNEXURE III - VII)
1. Both General, Police and Counting Observers are required to submit arrival and departure report to the Commission immediately after reaching constituency(ies)/ District and also, just before leaving the constituency(ies) / District. (Format of the arrival/departure report is attached at Annexure-II).
2. Apart from the arrival report / departure report /self-certification and counting arrangement reports, the Commission, expects 5 mandatory reports from the General Observers. However, in case of any serious deviations, the Observers should bring it to the notice of ECI through interim report(s) as and when necessary.
3. Report to be submitted by General and Counting Observers are -
Name of Report Time of Submission
Arrival Report Immediately after arrival in the assigned Constituency/District. ANNEXURE-II
1st Report To be submitted immediately after the withdrawal of candidature.


ANNEXURE-III
2nd Report To be submitted 2 days before the poll-day (P-2 days)
3rd Report To be submitted immediately after the completion of poll.
4th Report To be submitted after scrutiny of form 17A on the day after the poll.
Counting
Arrangement Report
(Part A & B) To be submitted on C-1 day by all General and Counting Observers.
ANNEXURE-V
5th Report To be submitted after the counting of the votes by all General and Counting Observers. ANNEXURE-III
Departure Report Immediately before departure from the assigned constituency. ANNEXURE-II
Self-Certification Self-Certification mentioning the date of arrival, date of departure etc in the prescribed format. ANNEXURE-VI

4. Similarly, apart from the arrival report, departure report and selfcertification, the Commission, expects 4 mandatory reports from Police Observers. However, in case of any serious deviations, the Observers should bring it to the notice of ECI through interim report(s) as and when necessary.
5. Reports to be submitted by the Police Observers are -
Name of Report Time of Submission
Arrival Report Immediately after arrival in the assigned Constituency/District. ANNEXURE-II
1st Report To be submitted on the 2nd day of reaching the allocated district


ANNEXURE-IV
2nd Report To be submitted on the 5th day of reaching the allocated district
3rd Report To be submitted 2 days before the poll day (P-2 days)
4th Report To be submitted immediately after the completion of poll
Departure Report Immediately before departure from the assigned constituency. ANNEXURE-II
Self-Certification Self-Certification mentioning the date of arrival, date of departure etc in the prescribed format. ANNEXURE-VI

6. Oral communication with the Commission, on urgent matters which cannot be kept pending till the written report, through telephone or through any other fast and reliable means, during the field visit will be welcome. All telephonic communication should preferably be held with the Secretary concerned and must be followed by a written message in confirmation.
7. Owing to Observers’ report(s) being confidential in nature, the Observers should submit their reports directly to Zonal Secy/DEC Concerned in ECI only.
10. ARRIVAL OF OBSERVERS IN THE CONSTITUENCIES
1. The General and Police Observers are mandated to report in the constituency one day before the last day of filing of nominations.
2. General and Police Observer immediately upon reaching the assigned AC/PC will ensure that their local no. and contact details have been advertised properly in coordination with the DEO/RO concerned.
3. The DEO may appoint an English knowing officer as the liaison officer for the Observer and the liaison officer receive the Observer at the point of his/ her arrival in the State and escort him/her to the place of stay.
4. The DEO has to make arrangements for accommodation, vehicle and communication, like Internet, fax, office stationery and other facilities etc. as per the Commission’s instruction no. 464/OBS/2023/OPS dated 14.08.2023
5. The information/particulars as enumerated in the check list (Annexure-I) are to be provided to the Observer on his/her arrival along with the District Election Plan and a map, by the DEO/RO.
11. INTERFACE OF ROs/AROs AND DEO
1. The DEO will organize a structured meeting with the Observers as early as possible. All the ROs, AROs, SP, other election officials including the nodal officers for media cell, model code of conduct and the designated officers for Expenditure monitoring should be present in the meeting to apprise the Observers about the specific issues needing their special attention.
2. The Observer should proactively use this meeting to familiarize with the state of preparedness of the district administration in all aspects.
3. The Observer should monitor that:
(i) The posting of requisite officers for RO and ARO has been completed (including for counting)
(ii) The identification of all the venues, which will be used for dispatching, receiving, and counting, has been done and reviewed.
(iii) The list of polling stations has been finalized.
(iv) The machinery to monitor and implement model code of conduct and for election expenditure monitoring is in place.
(v) The primary list of polling personnel has been prepared.
(vi) The arrangements for receiving information from public and political parties-control room arrangements and inter coordination of police and DEO, RO control rooms, has been made.
4. After reviewing the check list (Annexure-I) the Observer shall take up the matter with the ECI, if any deficiency is found in the election preparedness.
12. SCRUTINY OF NOMINATION PAPERS
1. The Observer is expected to observe the scrutiny process and finalization of the contesting candidates after withdrawal very closely. The role of Observer in scrutiny is to observe the events, rather than guide formally. However, in a situation where there is some confusion, the observer shall report to the Commission but under no circumstances shall give instructions to the RO.
2. The Observers are expected to be present during the Scrutiny of Nominations. However, before the scrutiny, it is important that the Observers verify from the Returning Officers the availability of latest instructions and orders of the Commission, which are specifically relevant for the Returning Officers in discharging their statutory functions for scrutinizing the nominations.
3. The following items are important:
(a) The latest list of “Political Parties and Election Symbols” published by the Commission.
(b) Commission’s instructions on criminalization of politics and the latest Form of Affidavits, which will accompany every nomination form (ECI Instruction No. 3/ER/2003/JS-II dated 27th March, 2003 read with Instruction No. 3/ ER/2011/SDR dated 25th February, 2011, No. 3/4/ 2012/ SDR dated 24th August, 2012 and Order no. 509/11/2004-JS.I dated 3rd Feb
2016) as amended from time to time.
(c) The latest copy of the List of Disqualified Persons.
(d) Instructions and copies of latest versions of Forms A&B which are utilized by the political parties to indicate the names of their official candidates who are eligible for being allotted the symbol reserved for the party.
(e) An authentic copy of the Electoral Roll for the constituency.
4. It is important for the Observers to go through these instructions carefully in advance before they interact with the Returning Officers. They will confirm that Returning Officers have not only received the latest instructions but have understood the implications clearly.
5. As the nomination and scrutiny have been mandated to be done through ENCORE application, the observer must ensure that all nominations are 100% digitized, correctly entered and correctly scrutinized.
13. ALLOTMENT OF SYMBOLS
1. Immediately after the process of withdrawal of nominations is completed, the Returning Officers are to take up the process of Allotment of Symbols. The Observers will be available for overseeing this important activity. The RO should have the latest list of Political Parties and Election Symbols and any relevant symbol concession orders issued by the Commission with regard to political parties not recognized in the particular State but recognized in some other State and orders regarding allotment of Common Symbol to registered unrecognized parties.
2. As soon as the allotment of symbols is completed, a List of Contesting Candidates and Symbols allotted to them is prepared and published in Form 7A Special care should be taken regarding order in which the names of candidates appear in the list and Commission’s instructions in this regard should be strictly adhered to. This is a very important document and it is of utmost importance that copies of the same reach the Chief Electoral Officer at the earliest. The Returning Officers will make arrangements to send the original copy to the Chief Electoral Officer in the State /Union Territory through special messenger. The latter will consolidate these and send it through special messenger or camp bag to the Commission.

3. In case of Parliament election, the Commission publishes a Consolidated List of Contesting Candidates in English and Hindi. It is likely that some of the nominations may be filed in the local language. The Returning Officer will nevertheless prepare two sets of the copies of the Form 7A in English and Hindi and ensure that these are sent to the Commission through the process aforementioned. However, if the RO is unable to prepare the Hindi version, this can be left to the CEO who will get it done at his level. In any case, the English version and the version in the local language should invariably be sent by the ROs. In case of Assembly election, the CEO of the State publishes it in the official language of the State.
14. ELECTORAL ROLLS
1. Several complaints have been received in the Commission that during past elections the electoral rolls provided at the polling booths were different from the electoral rolls that were provided to the candidates. The Commission has viewed such complaints with concern and decided as follows:
(a) The electoral roll supplied to the polling booths shall be certified to be true copy of the one that has been provided to the candidates / political parties and the marked copy kept by the Returning Officer as per Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961 by one officer and one subordinate to the specifically responsible for the purpose.
(b) These officers shall sign the electoral roll supplied to the polling booths, on all pages.
(c) A copy of the electoral roll, which will be used on the day of election at polling booths (copy of the one given to the candidates / political parties), shall also be given to the Observer. The Observer shall check the authenticity of the roll provided at polling booths vis-a-vis the roll given to the candidates on the day of poll at the polling stations visited by him/her. The Observers will discuss this subject thoroughly with the RO and ensure that there is no room for any complaint on this score. This aspect should also be explained to the candidates and political parties during discussion.
2. The Observers should monitor the action plan prepared for covering the residual electors, issue of EPIC, identification of electors absent without family linkage, expired electors and duplicate entries and preparation of polling station wise list of such entries. Commission has mandated that if any elector figuring out in this list appears for voting, the strict identity checks should be applied.
15. MEETING WITH THE CANDIDATES
The RO should conduct a meeting in the presence of Observer with all the contesting candidates and party representatives on the last day of withdrawal or on the next day and brief them about —
a) Important aspects of the model code of conduct,
b) Expenditure reporting formats, rate list etc. and frequency of reporting
required, time and place of reporting of expenditure,
c) Issuance of permissions for vehicles, processions and public meetings
d) Date and time of EVM/VVPAT preparation and candidates’ role in it. Candidates should also be briefed about the working of VVPAT system.
e) Interaction of Observers with the candidates/political parties/electors (with specific details of time, contact numbers and place for meeting the Observers).
f) Important aspects of conduct of elections (like appointment of polling
agent, counting agent, election agent — their rights & duties).
g) The Observers should explain the concept of worry list. Wherever a candidate has apprehension about any unfair practice, procedural lapse, he will bring them to the notice of the Observer through the worry list indicating details of polling centers and reasons for such apprehension.
h) Latest instructions of the Commission or important changes from past practices should be brought to the knowledge & notice of candidates.
i) The Observer should explain clearly about c-VIGIL app for the model code of conduct violation reporting, EMS app for randomization of EVM machines, suvidha app for applying for permissions and suvidha candidate app to monitor the status of permission and candidature.

16. VISIT OF AREAS IN THE CONSTITUENCY AND POLLING STATIONS
After finalization of contesting candidates by the RO, the Observer should visit as many polling stations (areas thereof) to understand the constituency in social, economic and political context. During their visits, the Observers shall definitely visit all new polling station, sensitive polling stations and distant polling stations.

17. REVIEW OF OVERALL PREPAREDNESS OF LAW & ORDER MACHINERY
1. The Observer should have a detailed discussion at a mutually convenient time not later than 4 days of his/her arrival about the following.
(a) Adequacy of police personnel, (b) Requirement of Central Forces, (c) Preventive actions taken (preventive detentions, bonds & arms deposition)
(d) Identification of critical clusters and polling stations through vulnerability mapping
(e) Sector plans for policing on the day of poll, (f) Response strategy on the day of poll and transportation of EVMs/VVPATs, and
(g) Discussion about sensitivity of inter-district, national and international boundaries.
2. The vulnerability index mapping of the district should have been completed. The Observer should ensure whether this has been done and critical clusters and polling stations are identified. The sector plan for police patrolling and the requirement for additional force should be reviewed in this context.
3. The distilleries in the district should be monitored for the stock position of liquor and any abnormal increase in outflow during the election period should be checked. This should be compared to the average of the last six months.
18. OBSERVATION OF IMPLEMENTATION OF MODEL CODE OF CONDUCT
1. It has been the most important and crucial task of Observers to ensure non- partisan and effective implementation of Model Code of Conduct.
2. The main areas for strict vigil are: -
(a) Use of vehicles for campaigning without required permission, (b) Use of muscle power to mobilize or restrain people from voting, (c) Flow of liquor and money and ‘gifts’ to ensure voting in favor of a particular candidate, (d) Divisive tactics through inflammatory and condemnable speeches/ acts, and
(e) Dealing with defacement of property as per prevailing law, if any, of the state, in case of absence of any such law as per the latest instruction of the ECI.
3. To ensure effective enforcement, the Observer should check whether the enforcement squads are formed with clear territorial jurisdiction to have accountability. The teams of enforcement should consist of civil and police personnel.
4. Detailed instructions) in this regard are made available on Commission’s Website after the announcement of election(s).

5. All teams should have c-VIGIL investigation app installed and running and that the disposal of each violation reported through the c-VIGIL application is addressed by the enforcement team. The c-VIGIL observer should install the c-VIGIL observer app and continuously monitor cVIGIL case in his jurisdiction.


19. APPROACH OF THE OBSERVER IN IMPLEMENTATION OF MODEL CODE OF CONDUCT
1. The approach of observer should be to get the complaint inquired by DEO/ RO through the inquiry officer and tracking how the inquiry is conducted and how the concurrent corrective measure is affected. The Observer should advise the RO/DEO about the violations and appropriate action to be taken. However, in case of lapses on part of the authorities even after advice of the Observers, the Observers should immediately communicate lapses to the ECI. Observer should use videography as an effective tool to implement Model Code of Conduct.
2. Observers are eyes and ears of the ECI and not the executives in the
field. There are several instances where implementation of Model Code of Conduct has been handled for the same issue in different manner in different constituencies. Some instances are given as case studies to sensitize you to this aspect-
Situation A An Observer found a vehicle with a party flag and lot of workers with a microphone campaigning for a candidate without a permit.
a. He detains the vehicle with the help of his PSO and calls for the police and orders them to take a particular action, issues a specific instruction in writing.
b. He reports the matter on phone to the concerned SP and subsequently writes a letter and warrants an ATR from the SP and RO. In case of non- action, the lapse is reported to ECI.
c. He gives an instruction to immediately arrest the people in the vehicle to the police in writing.
The ECI would appreciate the option “b’ in this case. However, to ensure ripple effect, the incident and the action taken should be publicized in the media to create further deterrence through the RO. In any case the Observer is not expected to interact and brief the media personally.
Situation B
There is a complaint from a particular political party that there is possession of illegal arms in a particular location by another contesting party. The complaining party does not disclose the location and requests for a police party to raid in a location to be specified later.
a. The Observer agrees to the demand and orders the SP to send a police party.
b. The Observer takes the complaint and location confidentially, asks the SP to act on it and report back. He also sends a videography team with the police party
c. The Observer takes the police party and goes to the specified
location and raids it.
The ECI would recommend the option ‘b’ in this case a observers have to think and act independently after receiving a complaint and not physically move with one party or other as that is also seen as partisan.
Situation C
Every party has a list of star campaigners designated who shall be funded centrally from the party level for their travel and campaigning. One of the star campaigners deliver inflammatory speeches hurting the sentiments of a particular section of society and this is widely covered by media at national and local levels.
a. This episode and the contents of speech is recorded and reported to ECI and at the same time appropriate action by the Election machinery has been initiated. The Action Taken is proportionate to the gravity of the lapse.
b. This episode is not repotted to ECI and action has been initiated at the local level which is covered by local media.
c. It was not acted against at all.
The ECI would recommend option ‘a’ as the lapse is being covered by national media and the damage is no more localized and therefore the non- reporting of this even to ECI shall have negative effect on the general scenario of elections at the national level.
Situation D An observer witnesses that a public property has been defaced by posters which is serious violation of model code of conduct. He had to deal with this.
a. The Observer gets out of the vehicle and tears the posters himself.
b. He informs the RO and asks the RO to send the enforcement squad responsible for territorial jurisdiction. He documents the violation through videography. After a day or two checks
whether that violation has been dealt with and also ensures booking of that expenditure in the accounts.
The option ‘b’ is the desired response. ECI encourages effective observation rather than self-implementation of the Model Code of Conduct.
3. ECI envisages appropriate and timely action against lapses and at the same time proportionate flow of this information of action taken to the appropriate levels like local, district, State and national level to have a deterrence effect.
4. Every move of campaigning has an implication of election expenditure. The Observers are expected to correlate all the permissions taken and the expenditure statements submitted. In case of some expenditure not being reported, the standard rates prevailing in the district should be adopted.
20. WATCH ON EXPENDITURE INCURRED ON ELECTION CAMPAIGN BY THE CANDIDATES/POLITICAL PARTIES
1. The Commission appoints separate Expenditure Observers to monitor election expenses. For the purpose a separate manual/ guideline has been prepared by ECI. The observers should familiarize themselves with the expenditure monitoring guidelines.
2. Past experiences indicate that use of money power starts right from the distribution of tickets by the political parties. Subsequently, it takes various forms, which are enlisted herein below. However, it must be kept in mind that the enlisted ways of spending money are only indicative. There can be many other ways of spending money which should engage the attention of the Observers.
a) Booth-wise agents are appointed to purchase floating votes;
b) Large donations to clubs and organizations to influence its members;
c) Largesse to petty party workers to dole out the same to electors;
d) Rented crowds for party meetings;
e) Rallies and campaigns with purchasable crowd;
f) Presence of candidates at social occasions like mass weddings,
feasts, puja’s, jagrans, inaugurals, etc. where gifts are given on behalf of candidates;
g) Acceptance of felicitations by the contesting candidates at any educational or charitable organizations;
h) Distribution of free liquor/liquor passes to the electors;
i) Use of dummy candidates at election to utilize his quota of electioneering vehicles, etc.
j) Surrogate advertisements in print and electronic media whereby candidature is canvassed by unconnected persons/organizations so as to avoid the expenditure on the same being accounted for in the expenditure of the contesting candidates;
k) Bringing cinema celebrities and sportspersons to campaign;
l) Providing voters with caps, vests, umbrellas, bi-cycles, etc.

3. It shall be the duty of the Observers to ensure that all the instructions of the Commission are followed meticulously and there are no aberrations in their application. It is, therefore, imperative that the Observers should familiarize themselves with the extant instructions issued by the Commission which are available on the Observer Portal and on the Commission’s website.
4. The gist and highlights of various instructions on the issue of election expenditure is given hereunder for the benefit of the Observers:
a) Section 77 of the Representation of the People Act 1951 stipulates that every candidate at an election shall, either by himself or by his election agent, keep a separate and correct account of all expenditure in connection with the election between the date on which he has been nominated and the date of the declaration of the result thereof, both the dates inclusive.
b) Section 78 of the said Act further stipulates that every contesting candidate at an election shall within thirty days from the date of the election of the returned candidate, lodge with the District Election Officer, an account of the election expenses which shall be a true copy of all the account kept by him or by his election
agent u/s 77.
c) In order to facilitate monitoring of election expenditure, each candidate is required to open a separate bank account exclusively for the purpose of election expenditure. This account shall be opened at least one day before the date on which the candidate files his nomination papers. All money to be spent on electioneering shall be deposited in this bank account irrespective of its funding from any source including candidate’s own fund.
d) Even if a contesting candidate does not seriously contest the election for any reason whatsoever and incurs only a nominal expenditure on his security deposit, etc., he is required by law to lodge his account of election expenses.
e) Contesting candidates, who fail to comply with the requirement of law regarding the lodging of account of election expenses, are liable to be disqualified by the Election Commission u/s 10A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 for a period of three years.
f) The Election Commission of India has prescribed a format of the register which is required to be maintained by the contesting candidates along with supporting vouchers, bills, etc. arranged in a proper chronological order.
g) Along with the Register, the Election Commission of India has prescribed a format of “Abstract of Election Expenses” which has also to be filled up by the contesting candidates
h) The contesting candidates are further required to furnish an affidavit along with the “Register of day-to-day expenses” and
“Abstract of Expenses”
i) The prescribed register/forms/extracts of rules relating to lodging of returns of accounts of election expenses should be printed and made available to the contesting candidates in Hindi, English or the approved local language in which the electoral rolls are printed.
j) The supporting vouchers of the day-to-day expenses should necessarily bear the signature in full of the contesting candidate or his election agent.
k) The register along with the Abstract of expenses and the prescribed affidavit has to be made available by the contesting candidates for inspection by the Returning Officer/Designated Officer thrice before the date of poll. However, it has to be ensured that there is a gap of about four days in between each inspection and the first inspection may be on or after the 3rd day from the last date of withdrawal of nominations.
l) If a candidate is contesting election for more than one constituency, he is required to maintain and lodge a separate account of his election expenditure in respect of each such constituency.
m) The accounts of the candidate -will be scrutinized by the Returning Officer/ Designated Officers and he shall keep two photocopies of the relevant pages of the register. One copy of the relevant pages of the register shall be displayed on the notice board of the Returning Officer and the other copy will be retained in a separate file for each constituency as proof of record with the Returning Officer and furnish to the DEO on conclusion of the whole electoral process.
n) Where a candidate does not produce the register containing his daily account of election expenses before the designated officer/observer, despite notice, the DEO shall cause a complaint to be lodged u/s 171-1 of the IPC against the errant candidates.
o) Any person desiring a copy of these day-to-day accounts, should be provided the same by the Returning Officer, subject to the payment of usual copying charges
p) The candidate, while maintaining their register of accounts of election expenditure, should also account for all expenditure including those incurred prior to the date of nomination for preparation of campaigning material, etc. which are actually used during the post nomination period in connection with the election.
q) The expenditure incurred by the leaders of the political parties on account of their travel for propagating the programs of the party shall NOT be considered as expenditure in connection with election incurred or authorized by the candidate or his agent, provided the names of the leaders for this purpose are communicated to the Commission and the CEO of the State within a period of seven days from the date of notification of the election
r) In the event of failure of the political party to provide such names within the stipulated time, the aforesaid expenditure on travel of all leaders in the case of such parties will necessarily be included in the account of the election expenses of the candidate concerns.
s) The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Kanwar Lai Gupta Vs. Amarnath Chawla (A.I.R. 1975 SC 308) has held that the expenditure incurred by the political party, as distinguished from expenditure on general party propaganda, which can be identified with the election of the given candidate would be liable to be added to the expenditure of that candidate as being impliedly authorized by the candidate. The Apex Court has further held that a party candidate does not stand apart from the political party and if the political party does not want the candidate to incur the disqualification, it must exercise control over the expenditure which may be incurred by it directly to promote the electoral prospects of the candidate.
t) The expenditure on bullet proof cars and all others cars used by all the Ministers of Union and States and all other leaders of political parties shall be borne by the candidates.
u) All vehicles (including two-wheelers, motor-bikes, scooters and mopeds, etc.) being used by the candidates for the election campaign are required to be lodged with the DEO.
v) Whenever political parties or candidates use aircraft/helicopter for election campaign, prior information should be given to the CEO of the state. While giving such information, the following information also need to be furnished: -
(a) Number of aircrafts/helicopters used; (b) Name of the hiring companies; (c) Hire charges paid/payable; (d) Areas covered; (e) Number of sorties involved; (f) Passenger manifest;
w) The expenditure incurred by a political party on advertisements in connection with the election of a particular candidate or a group of candidates shall be treated as expenditure authorized by the candidates concerned and shall be accounted for in the election expenses of the candidates concerned. In case where the political party for the benefit of group of candidates incurs the expenditure then the expenditure is to be apportioned equally amongst the candidates.
x) The expenses on construction of barricades/rostrums etc. when done initially by the government agencies on account of security considerations on behalf of the party organizers are to be booked as expenditure of a candidate in whose constituency the said meeting takes place or to a group of candidates who are present at the time when the leader of a political party addresses such a meeting. In cases where there are more than one candidate of the political party present at the time of the said meeting of the “leader’, the expenditure will be apportioned equally amongst all, and the District Election Officer of the district where such a meeting takes place shall obtain the final costs from the concerned government agencies within three days of the event and intimate to the candidates their private share of expenditure. This information will also be intimated to the Returning Officer/District Election Officer of the Constituency/ District to which the other candidates belong.
y) Where the aforesaid expenditure are incurred from the organizer’s own funds, the same will be reflected in the accounts of the concerned candidates or a group of candidates present in the meeting of the leader.
z) It has been decided by the Commission that the candidates’ booths set up outside the polling stations should hereinafter be deemed to have been set up by the candidates as part of their individual campaign and not by way of general party propaganda and as such all expenditure incurred on such candidate’s booths
(kiosks) shall be deemed to have been incurred/ authorized by the candidate/his election agent so as to be included in his account of election expenses (not falling under exempted category). The DEOs have to notify the rates of the candidates’ booths set up outside the polling stations taking into consideration the cost of infrastructure used and also the notional expenses on daily allowances and refreshment etc. to the party workers manning those kiosks.
5. The Observers are advised to familiarize themselves completely with the aforesaid instructions of the Commission and prevail upon the Designated Officer to abide by the same. Wherever aberrations are noticed, the Designated Officers should be encouraged to issue notices through the Returning Officers to the erring candidates and make a note of the same in the register whenever they are produced for inspection.

21. MEDIA CERTIFICATION AND MONITORING COMMITTEE (MCMC)
1. There shall be a Media Certification and Monitoring Committee in each district with the following members:
a) District Election Officer/ Returning Officer of Parliamentary
Constituency
b) ARO (not below SDM)
c) An intermediary expert/ Social media expert (to be chosen by the
RO subject to the eligibility criteria)
d) Central Govt. I&B Ministry official (if any in the district)
e) Independent Citizen/ Journalist as may be recommended by the PCI.
f) DPRO / District Information Officer/ equivalent – Member Secretary
2. However, the role of Observers is limited to MCMC and Paid news, the following is provided for their information-
a) Precertification guidelines are applicable on advertisements on social media.
b) CEOs to send two hourly ATRs on media monitoring on poll day and pre-poll day to the Commission.
c) Timely alerts/response for Take down requests especially on social media handles (as per laid down procedure by nodal officers) can curtail misinformation/ hate speech, fake news instances derailing electoral process.
d) Expenditure on campaigning through internet including social media website to be included in candidates’ expenses. Expenditure incurred in virtual campaigning is to be included in the expense accounts.
3. Besides carrying out the already assigned work of certification of advertisements, this Committee will also monitor both print and electronic media including cable networks, and record either in CD or DVD, keep a photocopy of all advertisement / paid news / election related news of the contesting candidates/ political parties.
4. The DEO will ensure that this Committee is provided with all the national and local newspapers, having wide circulation in the constituency, three to four TV sets with connections of all the local and national News channels and one recording device and separate rooms so that they can watch and record all the advertisements/discussions related to the election. The Committee will also look into MCC violations in the Media sphere and send a report to the DEO with copy to the General Observer. The MCMC shall see all the newspapers, print media, electronic media, cable network, mobile network, and other modes of mass communication like bulk SMSs etc., and keep record of the advertisements, advertorials, messages, discussions, and interviews relating to the candidates and parties. This committee will submit a Daily Report with respect to each candidate to the accounting team with copy to RO and Expenditure Observer with respect to expenditure incurred by the candidate on election advertising including the assessed cases of Paid News, along with supportive paper cuttings/clippings, recordings of relevant TV and Radio advertisements, which will also be included in the Shadow Observation Register. The RO will issue notice to the candidate with regard to the incidents of Paid News in consultation with the Expenditure Observer for not showing the expenditure on such publication.

22. EXPENDITURE MONITORING CONTROL ROOM AND CALL CENTRE
A 24x7 Call Centre will be established in the Control Room at the district level to operate from the date of notification of election. The call center will be given toll free telephone number with 3 or 4 hunting lines which will be widely publicized for the public to inform corrupt practices related to election. A senior officer will be put in-charge of the control room and call center who will be responsible for receiving and recording the complaints and passing them on to the respective officer for action without any delay. The call center will be provided with sufficient staff to man the telephone lines round the clock.
23. DISTRICT MEDIA CELL
1. The DEO shall create a cell for dealing with media headed by Public
Relation Officer and the main functions shall be-
a. The cell shall collect various clippings about the elections and also the advertisements from all the newspapers including the vernacular languages and provide this with translation if required to the Observer through the liaison officer. This should be done on a day- to-day basis by the media cell. Liaison officer may do this exercise depending on the location of the Observer and an allowance shall be provided for this to the liaison officer.
b. Prepare and circulate the note on various steps initiated during the day against violations of MCC to the Media. These notes shall not include any direct quotes to the media by the Observer, and
c. They should also ensure that videography of all the public meetings are done and passed on to the Observers. They should aid the Observers in viewing and bringing forth any violations of MCC to the notice of the Observers.
24. PREPARATION OF POLLING PARTIES AND TRAINING
1. To ensure transparency, the Commission has formulated a comprehensive three-stage randomization plan for selection and deployment of polling staff. In the first stage of randomization, polling staff is randomly selected from a complete database of all Government employees working in the district. This process would have been completed before arrival of the Observer. However, the Observer should examine the outcome of the process and ensure that the selection has been random.
2. The second stage of randomization is for polling teams and assignment of the Assembly Constituency to which they shall be deployed. The polling station to which these teams will be going would be known only
after the third stage of randomization, which is usually done on the day just before dispatch. For election to Lok Sabha, the Commission has directed that the polling staff may be randomized within their Parliamentary Constituency, as far as possible, so that they can vote through EDC.
3. Success of the poll process depends a lot on the quality of training imparted to the polling staff. Observer should monitor the training process and take care that:
a) All the staff appointed for poll duty is trained.
b) The trainers are well versed with the election process. It is a
good practice to use the Sector Officers as trainers.
c) Training is imparted in small groups and not very large groups to ensure that proper focus is maintained.
d) Training covers all aspects of poll management, including EVM (CU, BU and VVPAT) and Non EVM aspects, Forms and certificates to be filled by the staff.
e) Special focus should be given to the latest instructions issued by the Commission since most of the polling staff would be unaware of them.

25. ELECTRONIC VOTING MACHINE
1. The Observers will check on the stock of FLC-OK EVMs/ VVPATs available in the district.
2. The Commission issues detailed guidelines to the Chief Electoral Officers and the District Election Officers for training and awareness (only digital) on the use of EVMs. It has to be seen whether these training programs have been taken up properly and the people are aware of the method of casting vote on the EVM. The training of Presiding Officers and polling personnel, especially the third polling officer who controls/ incharge of Control Unit on poll day, on the use of EVMs is critical.
3. Observers should familiarize themselves with the latest instructions on EVM/VVPAT.

26. VOTER VERIFIABLE PAPER AUDIT TRAIL SYSTEM (VVPAT)
1. VVPAT was introduced in 2013 to provide even greater transparency to the poll process. TheVVPAT is an additional unit attached to the EVM, which prints a small slip of paper that carries the symbol, name and serial number of the candidate voted by Voter, which is visible for 7 (seven) seconds in the viewing window.
2. The voter after pressing the button on BU can view the printed slip on VVPAT through the viewing window and thus can verify that the vote is recorded for the Candidate of his/her choice.
3. These paper slips are automatically cut and stored in a sealed compartment of WPAT and can be used later to crosscheck the votes in CU as per the prescribed procedure by ECI. The printing of slip in WPAT is an additional verification to the voter, besides glowing of LED near candidate button and the beep in EVM system.
26a. Randomization of EVMs/VVPATs The Commission has also mandated randomization of EVMs/VVPATs to avoid apprehension of any attempt of manipulation of EVMs/VVPATs. This randomization is done in two stages. In the first stage, which is done before the arrival of the Observers, EVMs/VVPATs are allotted to a particular Constituency and in the second stage, which is done in the presence of the contesting candidates and Observer, an EVM/VVPAT is allotted to a particular polling station.

26b. Commissioning of EVMs and VVPATs
- Commissioning of the EVMs and VVPATs is done under the supervision of the Returning Officer in the presence of the contesting candidates/ their representatives.
- Ensure that the ECI instruction in the matter is followed.
- Ensure that VVPAT slips generated in the commissioning process is shredded on daily basis.
26c. Use of Symbol Loading Unit (SLU) and storage of SLUs after Commissioning of EVMs & VVPATs.
- During the commissioning period in Assembly Constituency/Segment, all symbol Loading Units(s) along with its accessories shall be in the custody of the RO/ARO, as the case may be and shall be securely stored in commissioning premises.
- After the completion of commissioning process i.e. symbol loading process for the Assembly Constituency/Segment, the SLU(s) used for symbol loading along with the accessories shall be stored as per protocols prescribed by ECl.
- Ensure that the ECl instruction in the matter is followed.
27. PREPARATIONS FOR DATE OF POLL
1. Effective checks to curb electoral malpractice or vitiation of the poll process by way of booth capturing, rigging, creating a scare of fear and panic among electorate and effectively preventing them from casting their votes are major concerns.
2. The methods adopted by unscrupulous elements vary from State to State and from constituency to constituency. The Observers are expected to familiarize themselves about the tricks of the trade prevalent in the area as well as identify the specific areas prone to such mischief.
3. The Observers between or amongst them should carefully plan out, in confidence, the areas, which they would focus on, during the actual period of poll. This will be kept confidential and is not to be shared with anyone including the District Election Officers, ROs, Escort and Liaison Officers and PSOs.
28. VISIT TO DISPATCH CENTERS
The Observers will visit the dispersal centers for dispatching the polling parties to different location and make a brief report on the manner in which the operations are being conducted. They will particularly see that the random formation of polling parties is being truly and correctly implemented.
29. MICRO OBSERVERS
1. The employees of the Central Government/ PSUs are appointed as Micro Observers. The Micro Observers are expected to observe the polling process on the day of poll. They are assigned duty in the polling station. They shall be part of the polling team and be seated in the polling station. They are to be present in the polling station before the mock poll starts. They shall report about the poll day in the given format, Report of Micro observers.
2. Micro Observers are to be trained by the Observers two days before the poll with the help of RO and posted in the polling stations, which are critical. Therefore, an arrangement is required wherein Micro Observers are stationed at a central location on the day of polls and they are moved to specific polling stations as per requirement (like absence of polling agents, critical polling stations etc.)

3. Micro Observers need not cover all the critical polling stations. They should be used effectively and not on an extensive basis unless required. The Micro Observers may be sent -with the polling parities in case they are required to perform duty at remote locations.


30. SPECIAL OBSERVERS
In case when special circumstances prevail, the ECI may send Special Observers who shall be working on specific agenda delineated by ECI and they are on par with the other Observers working in the constituencies. They report to the ECI directly and have no supervisory role over other Observers. However, to enable them to get a clear picture of the happenings going on in the constituency, they are required to discuss and get information from other Observers of the district/ constituency.
31. POLL DAY ACTIVITIES
1. One of the most important responsibilities of the Observers is to oversee the actual poll. On the date of poll, Observers available in the constituency should tour the maximum number of booths as is physically possible during the hours of polling. For this purpose, they will mutually decide as to which polling stations they will visit on the poll day. Also, to save time they may consider carrying some packed food and start field visits well before the poll begins. The presence of the Observers in the field on the date of poll and their visits to polling stations should be an effective deterrent against electoral malpractice and vitiation of the poll process. The Observers will ensure prompt and effective action on this score by interacting with the District Administration constantly through telephone, wireless, VHF Radio sets etc.
2. Commission has mandated conduct of mock poll before the actual poll begins to demonstrate proper functioning of the EVM/VVPAT to the polling agents. To this effect, the Presiding Officer has to sign a certificate in the format prescribed by the Commission. Observers should monitor that the mock-polls have been conducted and the POs have issued the certificate to that effect. Importantly, it should be ensured that result of mock poll is cleared from its Control Units and Paper Slips of mock poll in VVPAT Box are removed before commencing poll.
3. They should look for any unusual activity or lack of activity around a polling station to sense whether any electoral malpractice has vitiated or is likely to vitiate free and fair polls. Absence of women in the queues may be an indicator of something unusual. The Observers should in advance study and acquaint themselves with the pattern of electoral malpractices in the past elections in different areas. On this basis, they can look for tell-tale signs, of any irregularities. They should constantly remain in touch with the RO, ARO, Sector Magistrates and other officers on duty to get feedback as well as to convey anything specific for corrective action to be taken by the concerned authorities on the basis of what the Observers have actually seen in the field.
4. They should also go inside Polling stations and check for the progress of polling, the compliance of prescribed procedures by the polling officials in conducting the poll, the presence of polling agents, the updating of entries in the Presiding Officer’s diary and such other matters that need verification. Register of Voters (Form 17A) must be checked with display of total votes polled on EVM and Observer must sign the visit sheet along with his observation and record the time of his/her visit. Special attention should be paid in the case of polling stations where polling agent of only one candidate is present.
5. The Observers will also take stock of the collection of the
EVMs/VVPATs and the transport of polling parties and polling materials under appropriate security arrangement. The convoys once started should only stop at the destination, that is, the strong room where these are to be stored.
6. An important point to be noted is that Form 17C has been completely and correctly filled in by the Presiding Officer and these are deposited along with the Presiding Officer’s diary at the collection centers and strong room.
32. RECEPTION OF POLLING PARTIES
1. There is need to focus on polling stations wherein-
a. Polling was disrupted temporarily due to EVM failure or any
other reason.
b. Serious complaints were received and
c. Confirmation regarding mock poll certificate not received.
The Returning Officer has to prepare a report of such polling stations with their names and numbers and send it to DEO and Observer by 4 P.M. and the polled EVMs/VVPATs and other documents pertaining to these polling stations are to be received in a special counter and not in the regular counters as a rule. The Presiding Officer’s diaries have to be checked thoroughly for these polling stations.

2. At the reception center, it should be ensured that a copy of Form 17-C is kept with the respective EVM in strong room. Other documents should not be kept in the EVM/VVPAT strong room. Other document should be kept separately in a separate strong room to facilitate access when required.
33. SCRUTINY OF REGISTER OF VOTERS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS
1. In order to deter electoral malpractices, the Commission has directed that scrutiny of various documents like Presiding Officers diaries, Register of Voter (Form 17A), Micro Observers reports, Visit Sheets, report of Zonal
Magistrates etc. shall be taken up after completion of poll for polling station selected on the basis of detailed criteria laid down by the Commission. This scrutiny shall be taken up at 11:00 AM on the day next to the day of poll.
2. The scrutiny of the Register of Voters and other documents shall be taken up as laid down by the Commission and the Observer should ensure that his/her travel plan is so laid out that his/her departure from the constituency is not before 36 hours after completion of poll.
34. RE-POLL AND ADJOURNED POLL CASES
1. The report of the Observer is the most important input for the Commission for taking a decision on ordering re-polls. The Observers should therefore be vigilant and alert about any incident or activity, which might or might have vitiated the poll process so that they can send a specific report to the Commission on this matter. Sometimes, information received from other sources are referred back to the Observers on telephone by the concerned Secretary or Deputy Election Commissioner and the Observers are expected to make such enquiries and verification as are possible within the constraints of the time available. After this and after taking into consideration other inputs made available to the Commission, re-poll is ordered in such of the polling stations as is considered necessary and appropriate by the Commission.
2. It is of utmost importance that the re-poll itself is not vitiated in any manner. The Observers will give specific and comprehensive report on the actual conduct of re-poll. The re-poll, if any, is normally held on the second day following the date of poll unless specified otherwise.
3. In case of re-poll:
- Ensure that EVMs/VVPATs for re-poll have been drawn from unused reserve list and intimation has been given to the candidates/ their agents.
- Ensure that the address tag on the EVMs/VVPATs clearly mentions that EVMs/VVPATs are for use in the re-poll indicating the date and Polling Station number.
- Ensure that pre-printed sticker "Re-poll EVM/VVPAT" has been
pasted on the EVMs/VVPATs and on their carrying cases.
- Ensure that after re-poll the strong room has been re-opened in presence of the candidates/ their agents and observer for storage of the re-polled EVMs.
- Ensure that re-polled EVMs/VVPATs has been placed together with the EVMs/VVPATs which were used earlier in the original poll.
- Ensure that sticker "TO BE COUNTED” with bold print has been pasted at the time of placing the ‘Re-Poll EVM’ the strong room and also ensure that the sticker ‘NOT TO BE COUNTED’ with bold print on the old EVMs/ VVPATs has been pasted to remove any confusion at the time of counting. The specification of sticker are as under:
 Dimension 15 cm x 10 cm
 Color: Pink for AC and White for PC elections
- Ensure that the unique ID number of the EVMs/VVPATs used in repoll has been entered in EMS
35. END OF POLL REPORT
The Observers will send a report in the prescribed form at the end of poll showing the role of polling agents and the number and nature of complaints received in regard to each polling station. In addition to this, the Observer has to send a comprehensive report highlighting all-important factors, in case any re-poll is recommended by him/ her for a particular polling station or a group of polling stations.
36. COUNTING OF VOTES
1. The Commission has prescribed a format for approval of counting centers and the Returning Officers have been directed to personally inspect each counting center and send their proposals to the Commission for its approval. During the initial stage of their visit, i.e. before the scrutiny of nomination papers, the Observers will check if the data in the format has been sent to the Commission for approval by that time.
2. During this very stage of the visit itself, the Observers between them will also inspect each counting center for a preliminary assessment of the facilities in the counting center and to verify that these are as per specification prescribed by the Commission. In addition to what is given in the ‘handbook for Returning Officer’, the recent instructions given by the Commission should be read by the Observers thoroughly and, on this basis, they will interact with the Returning Officers to effect any further improvement as may be necessary for making the arrangements in the counting centers, up to the standard prescribed by the Commission.
3. One of the most important features relates to provision of specific facilities for the Observers and media in the counting centers. It is now mandatory for the Returning Officer to provide a separate room or a cubicle for the Observer or Observer in each counting center with one STD telephone and a fax machine.
4. The Observers will ensure that RO/DEO and the technical staff assisting them have tested the ENCORE software and are ready for fast transmission of final result to ECI using this software. They will have to use the password given to them and transmit the data to ECI. As this data gets loaded to the website automatically, it is essential that wrong data is not transmitted on the counting day. Hence doing the “dummy run” on designated date is also essential.
5. The statutory provisions regarding Observers specifically focus on their role during the counting process and empower them to stop counting and to direct the RO/ARO not to declare the result in circumstances mentioned in Section 20B of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. The statute thus enjoins a special responsibility on the part of the Observers to oversee and supervise the counting process and also to provide a direct immediate communication to the Commission. The Commission accordingly expects that Observers will have a key role in the superintendence of the counting process.
6. The staff selected for counting has to be randomized on the day of the counting early morning before the counting begins. The Commission is particularly concerned that the entire counting arrangement should be orderly and well structured. The Commission attaches great importance to the fact that the actual counting is done in such a manner that it is not only smooth and efficient but more importantly transparent and correct. Reasonable opportunity is to be afforded, as per existing instructions of
the Commission, to let the counting agents of the candidates get a clear view of the counting process as it goes on each counting table. There should be no room for any doubt.
7. The Commission has issued detailed orders regarding the arrangements for counting. These include the specifications for selections of counting centers and for managing the counting process.
8. For ensuring accuracy of the result of counting, a round wise statement shall be prepared by the Returning Officer. Both the Returning Officer and Observer shall personally verify that number of votes posted against the name of each candidate in respect of every counting table tally with the figures as shown in part II of Form 17C (result of counting) pertaining to that table. They shall append their initial below the total of each counting table. A copy of the detailed table/wise, polling stationwise, round-wise breakup of the votes will be kept by the Observer in his/her folder.
9. As a measure to cross check the correctness of counting, observers are required to randomly select two EVMs counted in a round and with the help of additional counting staff provided to them to assist in this regard ascertain once again count of votes polled by each candidate and after getting satisfied, then only countersign the relevant column of proforma for recording of votes. The Additional Counting staff shall prepare the result of two randomly selected EVMs in the prescribed proforma for recording of votes.
10. The tallying process at the end of each round of counting should be completed in a systematic manner and the round-wise progress announced within the halls by the concerned ARO-in-charge and also written on black/ white board, which should be clearly visible to all. Immediately thereafter, this should be announced over the public address system. These public announcements could be centralized, in a counting centre with multiple halls.
11. The Observers will also ensure that as soon as the final results and the winning candidate are announced and all the relevant papers are signed by the RO, the final detailed result is transmitted to ECI website. For this Genesys software shall be used.
12. The Observers should ensure after the declaration of result that the RO sends to CEO the duly filled and corrected copies of a) Final Result Sheet in Form 20,
b) Declaration of Result in Form 21C,
c) Return of Election in Form 21E.
13. It may be noted that only the name, which is given in the Nomination Form, is normally valid for all future references and use in the other related documents. The list of contesting candidates in Form 7A should reflect this name exactly and correctly with same spellings as given in the Nomination Form, unless the RO allows any deviation under Rule 8 of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961. Eventually the name of the candidate who is returned from the constituency is given in the declaration of the result in Form 21C. It is absolutely imperative that this Form 21C, as also the return of the election in Form 21E and the certificate of the election in Form 22 contain exactly the same name as given in the list of contesting candidates in Form 7A. Consistency of the names in the Forms 7A, Ballot Paper and Forms 21C, 21E, 22 has to be maintained without fail. The Observers will impress upon the Returning Officers about this aspect and ensure that full compliance is made.
14. The Observer should ensure ROs/AROs are trained in generating round declaration form RDF form 21C and 21E from the ENCORE portal.
37. DOs AND DON’Ts FOR OBSERVERS
DOs
1. Attend the briefing and debriefing session fixed by the Commission.
2. Draw up your tour programs sufficiently in advance and intimate to the Chief Electoral Officer, District Election Officer and the Returning Officer of the constituency concerned.
3. Note carefully the numbers of visits, duration of visits and the period of visits given by the Commission and strictly act according to this.
4. Ensure that your tour Programme is duly publicized within the constituencies allotted to you.
5. Identification of areas / polling stations which might require closer attention:
I. Visiting polling stations/areas, especially those for which vulnerability mapping is done.
II. Visiting polling stations/areas, which have previous history of malpractices, irregularities, and other such incidents.
III. Visiting newly created polling stations is necessary.
IV. Visiting polling stations/areas which might become sensitive during course of election due to any other reasons.
6. Monitor that adequate stock of all election materials are actually available as per the inventory of these items.
7. Strictly follow the guidelines from the EVM-VVPAT Manual-2018 Edition 3 and Status Paper on EVM Edition 3.
8. Familiarize yourself with the use of EVMs/VVPATs, and attend some training rehearsals.
9. Ensure that sufficient publicity regarding EVM/VVPATs has been given so that media and general public have no misgivings about EVMs/VVPATs.
10. Make an independent assessment of the Law-and-Order situation in general.
11. The observers are expected to guide advice and facilitate the efforts and initiatives of the DEO/RO in making necessary poll arrangements and conducting the elections in a free, fair, transparent, peaceful, and participatory manner.
12. Make a random check of as many polling stations as possible and verify them.
13. Monitor instances of violation of Model Code, ban on transfer etc.
14. Monitor the deployment of central forces to have maximum impact.
15. Send a report to the Commission within 24 hours of your return to the headquarters after the visit in addition, also please send spot report(s) from time to time as considered necessary.
16. Bring any development that merits immediate remedial action or attention of the Commission, to Returning Officer’s / Commission’s notice without any loss of time. Such information should not be deferred till the regular reports are submitted.
17. Upload on Observer Portal or send your report in a closed envelope addressed to the Secretary concerned looking after the particular State / Union Territory.
18. Attend meetings of the political parties called by the District Election Officers / Returning Officers.
19. Make independent assessment of the expenditure incurred by a candidate, political party, or any other person.
20. Speak to the local people and check posters, pamphlets etc. to arrive at an independent assessment.
21. Inspect the register of Election Expenditure prescribed by the Commission.
22. Obtain prior permission of the Commission before leaving the headquarters.
23. Maintain proper conduct in the Constituency as ECI Observers are keenly observed.
24. The Observers shall, at all times, conduct themselves in consonance with the highest standards of professional, ethical and personal conduct, as is expected of a responsible and mature officer of the Commission.
25. The Observers shall discharge their observation duties with due diligence, honesty, and responsibility.
26. Observers must be respectful of the local customs, traditions and cultures and refrain from expressing their personal opinions, perspectives, and political preferences.
27. The observers must appreciate and respect the democratic processes and fundamental values of constitutional democracy enshrined in our Constitution.
28. The observers should follow the virtues of simplicity and avoid any lavish lifestyle or extravagance.
29. The observers must display the highest level of due diligence and professional acumen in conveying their opinions and reports to the commission about any election-related incident.
30. Any out-of-box suggestion regarding the improvement in election process should be given only in the final report.
31. Any instruction to the election machinery for a new experiment/measure should NOT be given without prior approval of the Commission.
32. All reports to the Commission should be prepared solely on the basis of accurate, reliable and verifiable information and not on hearsays, half-truths, rumors or unfounded anecdotal references.
33. The Observers must maintain strict confidentiality in submission of their reports and assessments to the Commission.

DON’TS
1. Do not ask for any exemption from the briefing session.
2. Do not travel to the Constituency -with your families.
3. Do not go to the State capital to meet the Chief Electoral Officer if the route to the constituency from your headquarters does not pass through the State capital.
4. Do not call meetings of the political parties on your own.
5. Do not make any unreasonable demands to the Chief Electoral Officer / District Election Officer / Returning Officer regarding accommodation, vehicles, security etc.
6. Do not leave your headquarters once you have been allotted specific constituencies without the prior written permission of the Commission.
7. Do not plan for arrival to the Constituency on the day of scrutiny.
8. Do not plan for departure from the Constituency on the day next to the day of poll or on the day of counting.
9. Do not defer submitting reports of any development, which requires immediate remedial action; bring it to the Commission’s notice by fastest means.
10. Observer has no executive role and role clarity is a must. For example, Observers should not pull the posters off the walls to clean up defacement.
11. The Observers shall not be a party to any illegal, unauthorized, or illegitimate activity or engage in acts, which can bring discredit and disrepute to the Commission and invite criticism from media, political parties, candidates, or any other quarter.
12. The Observers must not make any unauthorized public statements and exercise due caution before taking any definitive position in any election-related matter.
13. Discretion is much more preferable to any grand-standing or over-confident utterance.
14. The observers must not accept any offers of hospitality, avoid shopping at special discounts or attendance at private clubs/gymnasiums and avoid recreational/scenic tours/trips etc. during their stay in the assigned Districts/ACs.
15. The observers should not appear to be partial and exhibit political neutrality through their conduct and behavior.
16. The Observers are the eyes and ears of the Commission and not the mouthpiece.
17. The observers shall NOT interact with any media persons (except to receive any inputs or information offered by them), or give any form of press briefings or press releases regarding their assessment or actions, without the express authorization from the Commission.
18. The observers must abstain from expressing any views or opinions which may be directly or indirectly construed as support or preference for, or prejudice against any particular political party, coalition or candidate even in their private discourse with their colleagues or the election officials. This also applies to their interaction through electronic medium like WhatsApp, Twitter, Facebook, or other social media platforms.
19. Observers must ensure that no part of the report or election related information is shared with any unauthorized person or agency.
20. The over-arching spirit guiding the observers is cooperation and collaboration and not inquisition and enquiry.
21. The Observers are not deployed on a fault-finding mission, but to objectively assess the poll preparedness, identify the critical gaps and guide the DEO/RO to address them.
22. If any shortcoming or lacunae in the actions or performance of any election official in the state is not being addressed despite reminding the field machinery, it should be communicated to the CEO and the Commission, instead of direct confrontation or over-zealous criticism.

38. REVIEW POINTS FOR CENTRAL OBSERVERS
1. Polling Station:
- Commission’s instructions for assured minimum facilities at each polling station in view of COVID-19 situation.
- Voter Assistance Booth for ease of voters.
- All Women Managed Polling Station.
- Special Facilitation for differently abled, visually challenged, women, elderly and leprosy affected etc.
- Voter Facilitation Posters.
- Awareness posters on COVID-19.

2. Postal Ballot:
- Beneficiaries identified for postal ballot facility as per Commission’s latest instructions for postal ballot facility in view of COVID-19 situation.
3. Electoral Roll:
- Voter Information Slip (with information like Polling Station, Date, Time etc. but not the photograph of the voter) having QR code distribution arrangements & monitoring.
- Voter guide distribution.
4. Model Code of Conduct:
- Mechanism of strict enforcement of MCC- flying squads, excise teams, border check posts etc.
- Arrangements for “SOPs for last 72 hrs. till counting” and strict compliance.

5. Vulnerability Mapping:
- Whether list of vulnerable pockets/hamlets have been identified by the DM/SP and RO and have they visited them.
- Whether proper arrangement has been made for monitoring liquor
production units and liquor outlets. Details of action taken on this front so far.

6. Quality and Fidelity of the Transportation Plan and Communication Plan and arrangements for communication-shadow areas.
7. Training and deployment of Micro-observers.
8. Training of polling staff with special focus on electoral process, EVMs & VVPATs.
9. Deployment of Forces:
- Whether deployment of CPFs and SAPs has been prepared as per the directions of the Commission.
- Whether vulnerable and critical polling stations have been identified and proper security measures have been adopted.
- Whether CPF has been used for route-marches/ area domination in the vulnerable pockets/hamlets. Details of dates/time of such visits by CPF. • Whether daily action plan of the CPF has been prepared in consultation with DEO/RO. Comment of effective CPF usage so far and shortcoming if any.

10. Complaint Redressal Mechanism:
- Whether complaint redressal mechanism based on website and Call
Centers has been constituted.
- Whether the Call Center number has been given wide publicity.
- Whether the district contact center with 1950 toll-free no. has been set up, sufficient no. of agents have been placed, are able to register all information, feedback and suggestion sand complaints into National Grievances services portal NGSP. • Whether all complaints are disposed of in 24 hours.

11. IT Application:

c-VIGIL:
- Whether the district control room has been set up for handling new c- VIGIL cases.
- Whether flying squads/static surveillance teams have been registered with the c-VIGIL investigator and whether the investigation team adapt in handling c-VIGIL cases and reporting from the mobile app.
- Whether c-VIGIL cases are disposed in a prescribed timeline. Whether the Observer himself has c-VIGIL Observer app and is monitoring and reviewing the c-VIGIL cases.

Voter Helpline App:
- Whether the voter helpline application has been popularized electoral search, submission of form, submission of complaints, candidate affidavit and results.

Saksham ECI App:
- Whether Saksham ECI app has been popularized amongst PWD voters and whether the request of marking "as PWD", request for a wheelchair
is downloadable at the DEO/ RO level and whether the arrangements have been made.

ENCORE App:
- Whether appropriate ICT helpdesk to digitize candidate nomination in the suvidha has been done. Whether all the nominations are 100% digitized on the ENCORE application. Ensure all the returning officers are scrutinizing all the applications for nominations only at ENCORE and are correctly marking as accepted, rejected/withdrawn/contesting.
Suvidha Permission App:
- Whether all the permissions are been handled only at suvidha or not. Whether all the permissions are given on stipulated time
Suvidha Candidate App:
- Whether candidates have been told about the app for following up on the permission status and nomination status.

12. Arrangements for Poll Day Monitoring.
13. Arrangements at the EVM Strong Room:

- Whether proper arrangements have been made for video recording of the EVM/VVPAT strong room.
- Whether proper arrangements have been made for temporary stay/shelter for the representatives of the political parties outside the EVM/VVPAT strong room.
- Whether gloves and sanitizers were made available to each official handling EVM/VVPAT
- Whether proper lighting arrangements have been made.
- Whether plans for using the forces for securing the strong rooms where the EVMs and VVPATs are stored and for securing the counting centers and for other purposes, as required, have been formulated.
- Arrangement done for sanitization of Strong Room after completion of poll day.

14. EVM Arrangements:
- Whether mock poll conducted during candidate setting on 5% randomly selected EVMs/VVPATs.
- Whether all polling officials adequately trained on handling of EVMs & VVPATs in batch sizes of less than 50? How many batches conducted?
- Whether arrangements are being made to conduct hands on training and doubt clearing on EVMs during dispersal of polling parties.
- How many EVMs/VVPATs found non-functional during Candidate
Setting? Are these entered in EMS?
- Whether Commission's instructions regarding fitting of Polling Parties including Sector Officer's vehicles with GPS tracking for real time monitoring of movement of reserve EVMs and VVPATs have been implemented in letter and spirit?
- Arrangements at intermediate strong room, if any, as per ECI
instructions.
- Whether adequate staff has been deployed for monitoring of round the clock monitoring of EVM control rooms?
15. Polling turnout Arrangement ICT app:
- Whether all accounts of RO/ARO have been set up for entering every 2 hourly report.
- Whether all PRO/RO/ARO about the entry of estimated voter turnout, end of the poll turnout and the accuracy of entering male, female, and other data.
16. Counting Day Arrangements:
- Whether proper management for reception of postal ballots has been arranged.
- Whether proper security arrangement have been made at the strong room as per Commission’s instructions.
- Whether CCTVs/Videography arrangements have been as per extant instructions of the Commission.
- Whether proper arrangements have been made for deployment of micro- observers at each table in counting centers.
- Whether proper arrangements have been made for the Counting Halls as per the Commission’s instructions.
- Whether proper barricading has been done inside and outside the Counting Centers.
- Whether the paths for carrying EVMs to the Counting Centers have been properly sanitized with adequate security measures
- Whether proper arrangements have been made for the verification of VVPAT paper slips as per Commission’s instruction vide letter no. 51/8/ VVPAT/2017-EMS dated 13.10.2017 and 05.12.2017.
- Whether minimum 8mbps of lease line internet connectivity, backup lease line of 8 Mbps, computer system, printer, cyber security, online
UPS and minimum 8 hours of power backup generator have been put into place.
- Whether the ROs/AROs are trained in generating round declaration form RDF form 21C and 21 E from the ENCORE portal.

17. In view of the COVID-19 situation all Social Distancing and other safety norms as per guidelines issued by MoHFW and by the Commission were followed during each activity by all.
18. Confirm preparedness of CEO team on- • MCMC work of pre-certification of Political advertisements; Paid news
(reports thereof and follow up action as specified)
- Response mechanism for curbing fake news/misinformation
- Proactive dissemination of information to steer positive narrative • Share success stories with local media and media division at ECI
19. Any other important issue.

39. OBSERVER MOBILE APP
¾ Observer mobile app is specifically designed for all the Observers i.e. General Observer, Expenditure Observer, Police Observer, and Awareness Observer, and it starts from the date of allocation.
¾ Mobile App is available in Android and iOS operating systems and can be downloaded from Google Play store and Apple store. Observers need to download and install the required App and login with Observer code and password.
¾ The observer mobile app helps Observers to get the details of their deployment, Observers receives notification through App, provides facilities for observers to submit their arrival and other mandatory reports and overall helps the Observer in managing their profile.
¾ Observers may also get below details from the mobile App -
- Deployment status and Observer ID card
- View deployed flying squad teams for the selected Assembly Constituency
- View the details of the flying squad team details, and clicking on team id will provide the facility to make a call directly
- All report formats for submission
- Submit report directly from App
- View noticeboard information about the polling and counting
- View the number of live cases with tracking history about the citizen and action taken by the Flying squad team
- View the field unit report and returning officer report submitted for the case.
- Highlight the cVIGIL case if need action on urgent basis

40. IT APPLICATIONS BEING USED IN ELECTION MANAGEMENT
The Commission has enhanced usage of IT Application, to usher in greater citizen participation and transparency.
1. cVIGIL Application for filing Model Code of Conduct Violation cases cVIGIL provides time-stamped evidentiary proof of the Model Code of Conduct / Expenditure Violation by empowering every citizen to click a photo or video using his or her smartphone. The application is based on GIS technology and the unique feature of auto location provides fairly correct information which can be relied upon by flying squads to navigate to the right spot of incidence and take prompt action. This app prioritizes the speedy and effective actions by authorities and promised users status reports within 100 minutes.
a. c-VIGIL Citizen Mobile App: C-Vigil was built to report Model Code of Conduct violations during elections. This has following features-
- Register Complaints: The app allows every citizen within the election boundaries to report the Model Code of Conduct / Expenditure Violations by taking photo/audio/video through their mobile phones by signing into the application.
- Anonymous User: The app also allows the citizen to complain anonymously, without revealing their personal details/ identity.
- Geotagging: The app automatically enables a geo-tagging feature when users switched on their camera in the cVIGIL to report a violation, which helps the field unit to know the precise location of the incident.
b. Investigator App: c-VIGIL Investigator app has been made for the Field units like Flying Squads & Static Surveillance Team to investigate the cVIGIL Citizen cases and conduct Suo-Moto case reporting.
- Instant Action on incidents: The application forced the Field Unit to reach the spot of the incidence within 15 mins and only then they could upload their report.
- Suo Moto: One of the important byproducts of the cVIGIL was the use of cVIGIL by Field Units themselves to file suo-moto cases.
c. cVIGIL Monitor App: cVIGIL Monitor App provides access to all cases filed in the jurisdiction to Chief Electoral Officers (CEOs) and ECI Officials from where they can emphasize and highlight important cases for speedy investigation and redressal.
- Monitor Live Case/ Status of complaint: This is used for live case monitoring of complaints directly through mobile devices. Real-time tracking allows citizens and other officials, to check the progress of complaints.
- Emphasize/ Highlight cases: Officers can highlight/ Emphasize the cases for prompt resolution and enforce the time-bound pressure on flying squads.

d. cVIGIL Decider App & RO Dashboard: cVIGIL Decider App/ Dashboard enables the District Electoral Officer (DEO) / Returning Officers (ROs) to decide upon the cases which are sent by the Investigator.
- View Live cases: Decider can access all MCC Violation complaints and check real-time progress.
- Action on Cases: Decider/ Returning Officer can take actions such as Drop, Decide, and Escalate on cVIGIL cases after the report submitted by the Field Unit.
All above mobile Applications are available on both the Google Play Store and Apple App Store.
2. Suvidha Portal: This portal provides different facility to candidates/ political parties for online nomination, Permission as given below-
a) Candidate Online Nomination:
To facilitate filling of nominations, the Election Commission has introduced an online portal for filling the nomination & affidavit. The Candidate can visit https://suvidha.eci.gov.in/ to create his/her account, fill nomination form, deposit the security amount, check availability of time slot and appropriately plan his visit to the Returning Officer.
Once the application is filled through the online portal, the candidate only needs to take a printout, get it notarized and submit the application along with relevant documents to the Returning Officer in person.
The Online Nomination Facility is an optional facility to facilitate ease of filing and correct filing. The regular offline submission as prescribed under the law shall continue too.
b) Candidate Permissions module: Permission module allows the candidates, political parties or any representatives of the candidate to apply online for the permission for meetings, rallies, loudspeakers, temporary offices, and others through SUVIDHA Portal https://suvidha.eci.gov.in/. The Candidates can also track their application status through the same portal.
c) Nodal Mobile App: This application is for Nodal officers of various department like Fire, Revenue, PWD, Police etc. for giving No-Objection from respective departments. All Nodal Officers are registered as part of the ENCORE and they receive notifications on the mobile app, as and when a request for permission arrives. They can accept/reject permissions and upload their status by using the App. Nodal officers can automatically assign and get push notification as the permission is applied for. The Nodal App allows officers to take immediate action
i.e. whether Objection or No- Objection is to be granted to the candidate along with reasons for the same.
d) Candidate Mobile App: Nomination and permission can be filed through a web application namely Suvidha portal or Returning Officer can digitize the physical applications through ENCORE portal. Once the application is registered in ENCORE by the, the periodic status updates of Nomination, Permission can be tracked through Candidate App.
The Application is available on both the Google Play Store and Apple App Store.
e) Candidate Affidavit Portal: The Complete list of Contesting Candidates with their profile, nomination status and the affidavits will be available for public view through Candidate Affidavit Portal: https://affidavit.eci.gov.in/
3. Know Your Candidate (KYC) App: ECI has developed Know your Candidate (KYC) Applications for both Android and iOS platforms for informing about “Criminal Antecedents” status of candidates. This allows citizens to browse candidates with/ without Criminal Antecedents and empowers the citizens to know the criminal antecedents of the candidates.
The Know your Candidate (KYC) is available on both the Google Play Store and Apple App Store.
4. Electronically Transmitted Postal Ballot System (ETPBS) for Service Voter:
Electronically Transmitted Postal Ballot System (ETPBS) will transmit blank Postal Ballot through Electronic means to the Service Voters. Service voter can then send his vote through speed post.
5. Saksham ECI App:
PwD app is meant for Person with Disabilities. The PwD elector can make requests for marking them as PWD, request for new registration, request for migration, request for correction in EPIC details, request for wheelchair. It utilises the Accessibility features of mobile phones for voters with blindness and hearing disabilities. The Application is available on the Google Play Store and Apple App store.

6. Voter Turnout App:
Voter Turnout App will be used to display real-time estimated provisional voter turnout details of each Assembly Constituency/ Parliamentary Constituency entered by Returning officer. The application can also be used by the media to capture live estimated voter turnout data. All phases of the elections will be displayed through this app in real-time. The application is available on the Google Play store.
7. ENCORE Counting: The ENCORE counting application https://encore.eci.gov.in/ is an end-to-end application for returning officers to digitize the votes polled, tabulate the round-wise data and then take out various statutory reports of counting.
8. Results Website and Results Trends TV:
The timely publication of the round-wise information is vital for establishing a single source of authentic data. The counting data entered by respective Returning Officers is available as ‘Trends and Results’ for public view through ’ECI Results website’ http://results.eci.gov.in/ The results are shown with the Infographics and displayed with auto-scroll panels through large display screens outside the counting hall or any public place.
9. EVM Management System (EMS):
EVM Management System is designed to manage inventory of EVM units. One of the important modes to ensure a fair and transparent process in EVM management is the administrative protocol of the randomization of the machines before they are deployed in the Polling stations. The randomization is done in the presence of Political Parties/Candidates/ their representatives.
10. Voter Service portal: Through voter service Portal (https://www.voters.eci.gov.in/) (earlier https://nvsp.in & https://voterportal.eci.gov.in), a user can avail and access various services such as access the electoral list, apply for voter id card, apply online for corrections in voter’s card, view details of Polling booth, Assembly Constituency and Parliamentary constituency, and get the contact details of Booth Level officer, Electoral Registration Officer among other services.
11. Voter Helpline App (VHA):
Citizen can avail and access various services such as apply for voter id card, apply online for corrections in voter’s card, view details of Polling booth, Assembly Constituency and Parliamentary constituency, and get the contact details of Booth Level officer, Electoral Registration Officer among other services. The application is available on both the Google Play & Apple Store.
12. Observer Portal: This system is meant for the management of all types of observer’s i.e. general observer, police observer and expenditure observer. All the latest instructions of the Commission are available on the portal for the observers. It allows observers to verify and correct their personal information including important bank details for quick remittance and Local Mobile number for getting important SMS sent by the commission. They can check their deployment details online and can fill/upload Reports in their portal. They can also check their notice board for any information/instruction sent by the Commission. Main Features of Observer Portal are
as:
- View Filled Reports, Uploaded and Poll Day Related Reports by Observers x Send messages/SMS to Observers x Review Filled Reports x View deployment status
- View State-wise finalized list of observers x Candidate Details - Form 7A is available to observers x Download and print Observer ID card
Observer portal is further being revamped and redeveloped.
13. Observer mobile App: Observer App allows the General observers, Police Observers and Expenditure observers to file their statutory report like their arrival, departure etc. Upon deployment to a constituency, the Observer gets the complete deployment schedule in their mobile. Similarly, all notices, constituency details are available on the observer app. One of the important features of the app is the visibility of the cVIGIL cases directly on the observer app. The Observer can view all the cases and give his observatory remarks. This helps the Returning Officer in deciding the case. Similarly, all the flying squad locations are visible on the mobile app. This an observer can find them on the map, click to see the work being performed, and finally call them directly without the need of separately approaching them.
14. BLO App: BLO App (erstwhile known as GARUDA App) is a dedicated Mobile App for BLOs for performing all their tasks digitally. Following are the main features of BLO App:
a) Checklist/Field Verification of Forms
b) Collection of AMF (Assured Minimum Facility) /EMF (Extended Minimum
Facility)
c) Capturing of GIS co-ordinates of Polling Stations. It will help electors in searching their Polling Stations on Google Map.
d) Update of Photos of Polling Stations
e) Form Submission on behalf of Electors
f) House to House Verification

15. ERONET: ERO-Net application is available pan India, to all citizens of India for enrollment/ corrections/migration from Electoral Roll. The application on the backend is available for the Election commission of India, all Chief Electoral Officers, District
Election Officers, Electoral Roll Officers and Booth Level Officers
- All 26 States/ UTs are sharing common infrastructure at National Level.
- UNPER (Unified National Photo Electoral Roll) is a common database for all States and UTs with data of 95 crore electors.
ERONET standardized forms processing, standard database schema, and a standard template for eroll printing. It automates the process of electoral roll management starting from elector registration, field verification of electors, decision support system for Electoral registration officers and for providing extensive integrated value-added services.
Citizens can fill up various online forms on Voters’ Service Portal, https://voter.eci.gov.in or through Voter Helpline mobile application. The form is processed thereafter in ERONET. The applicant also gets periodical alerts and notifications on each activity performed at ERONET. Main Features ERONET system are as below:
a) Online Form Processing: The applicant submits the form online at nvsp.in and on completion of the same gets the SMS/ email alert. Thereafter ERO/ AERO check the application for the process further.
b) Maintenance of Health of Electoral Roll: Among the major laws governing elections is the Representation of the People Act, 1950, which mainly deals with the preparation and revision of the electoral rolls. Publishing of electoral rolls is a key process that happens before the elections and is vital for the conduct of elections in India.
c) Family Information: The entry in E-Roll is linked to family information. The polling booth is allocated keeping in view that the whole family can vote at the same location. ERO can view your family details before assigning parts and sections, thus deciding your voting booth.
d) EPIC Portability: Migration from one constituency to another while retaining the same EPIC number: ERO-Net facilitates easy migration from one constituency to another by facilitating seamless communication between the EROs of two constituencies. De-duplication is also taken care of while including entries in the ERoll.
e) Offline Form Processing: The data entry operator fills forms data in ERO-Net. AERO allocates jobs for Data Entry Operator and generates QR Code data file.
ERONET was further enhanced with alert and monitoring facilities were added at the level of ERO, DEO, CEO &amp; ECI level, along with Suo moto action for EROs and processing for removal of logical errors and DSE
- Digitization of Forms Received Offline Online system of Form Processing x Objective field verification x E-ROLL management with Unique EPIC x Number Generation Synchronization of E-Roll at National x Level Generation of Reports, Notifications x Alerts Monitoring Dashboards x Printing of electoral roll from ERONET for all states x Printing of Photo Voter Slip x Printing of EPIC Cards
16. National Grievances Services Portal:
A comprehensive National Grievance Service Portal (NGSP) has been developed by the Election Commission. This system has been developed in such a manner that in addition to providing redress to the complaints of the Citizens, Electors, Political parties, Candidates, Media and Election officials at National, State and District level, it also serves as a common interface for providing services through a common interface.
The system is seamless and Integrated Help Desk-cum-Call Centre-cum- Single Window system. This portal is available for citizens of India where people can directly lodge IFSC (Information, Feedback, suggestion and Complaints) into this. IFSC can be captured via a different medium like Online mode (Portal, Contact Centre) and offline mode (FAX, Letter, and Personal Meeting).
The application provides for a single interface for handling complaints by the Election officials. All Electoral Officers, District Election Officers, CEO and ECI Officials are part of the system. Thus, issues are directly assigned to the respective user upon registration.
