OVERVIEW
Elections are pivotal to nation building, symbolising the power of the people to choose their leaders and shape their collective future. The police, as guardians of law and order, play a fundamental role in maintaining a peaceful electoral environment. Police machinery plays a crucial role in conducting elections in a transparent, free and fair environment and ensuring a democratic electoral process without fear or favour. The Commission in the past has provided for various instructions and manuals pertaining to police functioning. However, with the increasing role of police in the present context of elections, there is a need to compile their roles and responsibilities in the form of a handbook which shall act as a guide for the entire police hierarchy in performing their duties pertaining to electoral activities.
The handbook embodies a vast array of topics that are required to be planned and executed by the police. They include planning of district security plan, preventive measures, understanding the concepts of vulnerability mapping and critical polling stations, MCC, expenditure monitoring, roll of CAPFs, VIP security, special plan for LWE/Militancy affected areas, social media management, poll day management etc. The handbook enlists activities that are to be carried out to ensure a peaceful environment that is required for elections.
A comprehensive chapter on training and welfare measures for police officials has been incorporated to ensure that the entire machinery is sensitised and aware about the activities and concepts involved in the election process. A checklist for officers, FAQ s and legal provisions have also been included for ready reference.
It is expected that this handbook will serve as a practical guide to the police functionaries involved in election process for streamlining their activities and equipping them with tools and strategies to address any issue that arises in the process of conducting elections in their jurisdiction

UNDERSTANDING POLICE ORGANISATIONS – ROLES & RESPONSIBILITIES.
General The Police ensure safety & security of entire polling machinery and poll material before and after completion of election process along with security to candidates. The role of the police during elections is to create a secure and peaceful environment, where citizens can exercise their democratic right to vote without interference or fear. Police play a critical role in upholding the rule of law and ensuring the legitimacy of the entire electoral process.
They ensure the following:
Maintaining law & order in and around polling stations and during events related to election campaigns.
Prevent voter suppression tactics (such as voter intimidation, coercion, or any attempts) which discourage people from voting and ensure voting without fear of intimidation or violence
Provide security for candidates, election officials and voters.
Securing sensitive election materials and infrastructure.
Managing traffic and ensuring the safe movement of people to and from polling stations and campaign events as part of their duties.
Ensure the safe transportation and storage of poll materials like ballot papers, EVM & VVPAT other poll material to prevent any possibility of tampering.
During rallies and protests, manage crowds to prevent disturbances and any untoward incidents.
Investigate election related crime and take appropriate action.
Enforce election laws, including regulations related to campaign finance, political advertising, including the conduct of candidates and political parties.
Provide assistance to election officials, and help them to set up polling stations & maintain a secure environment for counting the votes.
Respond to complaints related to the election process promptly and impartially.
Remain neutral and not show favouritism towards any political party or candidate. They must uphold the principle of absolute impartiality and neutrality in discharge of their official duties including election related duties.
Ensure strict enforcement of the Model Code of Conduct on the announcement of the dates of election.
Provide confidence building measures among the General Voter.
Role and Responsibilities of Director General of Police
He/She shall establish an Election Cell headed by the duly appointed SPNO, 6 months prior to the elections to streamline election related activities.He shall provide a sufficient number of Gazetted Officers and other ranks including infrastructural facilities to the election cell.
He/She shall ensure that all vacant posts in all districts are filled up well in advance especially those required for election related duties like Range IGPs / DIGs, Commissioner of Police / Senior Superintendents of Police / Superintendents of Police (District Police Chief), DSP/ Sub Divisions, DSP (Incharges of Assembly Constituency for Election purpose), officer-incharges of Police Stations, incharges of police posts, etc. Similarly, he will ensure filling up of crucial election related posts at State Headquarters also.
He/She shall ensure compliance of directions of Election Commission of India regarding transfer and postings of police officials connected with elections.
He/She shall ensure that the Training Division devises a programme for training of police officials deputed for election related duties.
He/She shall ensure timely completion of investigation of all cases related to previous elections and shall further ensure that final reports are filed in these cases before the competent Court.
He/She shall ensure that the State Protection Review Committee (Threat Perception Committee) reviews the security to be provided to all contesting candidates, election related officials / persons and other threatened / categorized protectees.
He/She shall ensure that police budget planning for the completion of election process including budget required by the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs), is done much in advance and the requisite amount is disbursed to the districts well in time, and definitely before the arrival of the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) in the state.
He/She shall designate an Additional Director General of Police/ Inspector General of Police Communications who is responsible for procuring and managing the communication system in State police. The officer shall be responsible for assessing requirements and providing communication systems at each Police Station including polling locations where wireless communication is to be established.
The DGP shall review activities of terrorists, gangsters, hardened criminals, people propagating left wing extremism, etc. He shall coordinate with central security agencies regarding this and activate state police machinery including State Intelligence / Counter Intelligence machinery to thwart any design of such elements to disrupt elections.
He/She shall ensure coordination with border protection agencies including Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) at international borders falling in the jurisdiction of the State, if any.
He/She shall ensure Inter-state coordination meetings with officials of bordering states and do the needful for interstate coordination and ensure complete sealing of inter-state borders.
He/She shall also ensure strengthening of Interstate / inter-district ‘nakas’ by providing necessary infrastructural facilities and round the clock operations of these ‘nakas’.
Assessment and Communication of availability and requirement of security forces to the CEO of the state & planning the deployment of security forces while referring to the deployment plans of the previous elections.
Obtaining proposals for conferment of Executive Magistrate powers on other officers from field units and ensuring conferment of the same by effecting liaison with the State Home Department.
He/she shall liaison with State Home Department for issue of notification under section 28-A of the R.P. Act, 1951 for deputation of police officers to Election commission of India.
To mobilise all types of forces within the State for smooth conduct of elections.
To create a conducive environment for peaceful conduct of elections.
To make arrangements of other logistics like bomb disposal squad, mounted police, boats, ammunitions, vehicles, helicopter, air ambulance, etc.
Making all necessary logistic arrangements for security forces.
The Director General of Police of poll going State shall ensure movement/ mobilisation of State Armed Police Forces for deployment in other states as well according to directions from the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India.
Role and Responsibility of State Police Nodal Officer (SPNO)
State Police Nodal Officer shall be appointed as per the instruction of the Commission(No.464/L&O/2023/EPS dated. 7th June,2023) and inter alia perform following duties/ tasks in close coordination with the Chief Electoral Officer:
Preparation of State (or Union Territory) Force Deployment Plan and getting it approved by Committee consisting of Chief Electoral Officer, State Police Nodal Officer and State CAPF Nodal Officer which finally will be vetted / modified by the General Observers including Police Observers appointed by the Election Commission of India (Manual on Force Deployment - 2023).
Prepare multilateral augmentation plan of taking Police Force / Home Guards etc. from the neighbouring State/UTs, on mutually acceptable terms, for any deficiency in the State Police Force due to large scale retirements and/or lack of fresh inductions.
Review and assessment of detailed daily Law & Order situations in the State/UT and ensure that timely measures are taken in this regard, considering the specific law and order concerns of the State/UT in the context of elections.
Coordination with all District Superintendents of Police / Commissioners of Police and other field officers (Police) on election related issues.
Getting all police officials deputed on election related duties trained by effecting liaison with the Training Wing of the State police force.
Taking specific measures for law and order prescribed by the Election Commission of India which inter-alia are as follows:
Monitoring of past electoral offences
Preventive actions and measures
Monitoring the process of Vulnerability Mapping and assessment of critical polling stations and corrective measures to prevent intimidation, influence etc. 6 months prior to the elections.
Execution of non-bailable warrants in a time bound manner.
Launching of special drives for unearthing illegal arms, ammunition, explosives, drugs, unaccounted cash, illicit liquor and other contrabands.
Check on illegal transportation and storage of cash and other inducements
Any other additional and enhanced measures to maintain and improve law and order.
Prepare and send consolidated reports in LOR-I format prescribed by the Election Commission of India, to State Home Department and consolidation of the reports in LORII for onward submission to the Chief Electoral Officer of the State for review and further submission to the Election Commission of India, from the day of announcement of elections till completion of elections process.
Assessment of requirement of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) from the Government of India and convey the requirement to the Chief Electoral Officer through the office of DGP of the State and State Home Department with proper justification.
Preparation of induction / de-induction plan of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) in consultation with State Level Force Coordinator of Ministry of Home Affairs.
Make a detailed plan for accommodation, transportation including management of food/ ration and security of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs), while on move or on static duty.
Preparation of phase-wise movement plan of forces and its monitoring. (Manual on force deployment - 2023).
To make contingency plans for rescue, evacuation, hospitalisation, air transportation, water transportation etc. by coordinating with different Departments/Agencies.
Creating a database of Helipads/Airfields and deploying a system for inbound / outbound frisking.
Close coordination with police setup of bordering States for inter- State border sealing, joint operations etc.
Coordination with officials of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) manning the International Border falling in the area of jurisdiction and other Border agencies.
Ensuring sealing of international borders, if any, 72 hours before polling.
Getting a communication plan as prepared by Addl. DGP/ IGP (Wireless) implemented. This plan shall ensure a proper communication system for shadow zones as well.
Preparing security plans for dispatch centres, receiving centres, training centres, strong rooms, warehouses etc.
Preparing special security plan for Left wing extremism affected areas or insurgency prone areas or areas with international borders, as applicable.
Regular and close coordination with police observers.
Identification of probable Improvised explosive device (IED) prone routes in the State for its circulation to the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs). It is applicable to LWE and militancy / insurgency affected areas.
Advance planning, preparation of route chart etc. for induction and de- induction of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs).
To set up a State Control Room for coordination with various types of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) coming in the State.
To ensure optimum utilisation of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) for confidence building measures.
Circulation of checklist, do’s and don’ts, election booklets and other relevant materials to all incoming forces.
To coordinate with the Chief Electoral Officer for deployment and optimal utilisation of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) in elections.
To ensure/review of Election Preparedness by the CP/SP from time to time.
Role and Responsibility of District Police Chief (CP/SSP/SP as the case may be)
Commissioners of Police (as the case may be)/Senior Superintendents of Police / Superintendents of Police of district concerned shall ensure the following:
Preparation of Deployment Plan
Preparation of district deployment plan based on state plan, containing micro-detailing and based on local situation/ requirements.
To ensure that there is no deviation from the State or District deployment plan without express prior approval of the senior most General/Police Observer.
Ensuring complete implementation of the District Deployment plan.
Make arrangements and Optimal Utilisation of Central Armed Police Force (Revised)
Assessment of need of force from State HQ, Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) on the basis of deployment pattern prepared at the State level.
To identify and arrange necessary logistical support to be provided to the forces.
The Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) jawans should be briefed about guidelines of Hon’ble Election Commission of India and relevant provisions of law relating to elections by the senior officers. In this regard, training workshops should be organized.
The honorarium to be provided to Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) jawans should be verified & certified well in advance and the same should be disbursed to them without any delay and in accordance with the rules and instructions, as issued by Hon'ble Election Commission of India.
To ensure that no Central Armed Police Force is kept as reserve & entire Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) are deployed on active election duty as stipulated in the guidelines issued by Election Commission of India.
Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) must not be deployed in less than half section strength in critical polling booths in normal areas, whereas in LWE affected/ Disturbed areas in critical polling booths, the minimum strength should not be less than one section.
Hold a de-briefing session with Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) officers and personnel.
Providing vehicles and adequate reserves of POL for movement for their further destination / headquarter or next state where elections are to be held.
Communication Plan
Ensure implementation of the communication plan as prepared by Addl. DGP/IGP (Wireless). This plan shall ensure a proper communication system for shadow zones as well and further ensure the following:
Police communication networks including Wireless, Polnet, LAN/ WAN must be used extensively in order to ensure smooth conduct of the electoral process.
Wireless sets should be provided at each of the sensitive polling stations, as also with the escort vehicles of observers, Sub Divisional Magistrates, each route zone / sector patrolling party, officer of Central Armed Police Force.
Vehicles of Senior Supervisory Officers should also be fitted with wireless sets and all the vehicles should have wireless sets.
Wireless communications networks shall continue till the polling is over and polling material including Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) are brought back to the strong room.
Communication between different agencies should also be established through static lines and mobile phones available with the concerned officers.
SIM/recharge vouchers are also proposed to be given to key supervisory officers of the security forces deployed on election duty to facilitate smooth communication.
Maintain a list containing the mobile phone numbers of all incharge of the Sector-Patrolling Parties and the Senior Supervisory Police Officers operating in their respective Districts, including the concerned officers/officials of the CAPF/SAP.
This information should be kept readily available at all the District Police Election Cells, District Police Control Rooms and State Police Control Room.
Deposition of arms / ammunitions
Ensure compliance of instruction issued by the Commission dated 8th June, 2023 on Measures related to Law & Order for conduct of peaceful free and fair General/Bye elections.
Order checking of all arms licenses and recommend cases of suspension of licenses during election periods to the District Magistrate cum District Electoral Officer. In order to ensure that all licensed arms holders are intimated for necessary deposition, the details of the licensed arms can be easily procured from the respective Online database maintained by National Database of Arms Licenses-Arms licenses(NDALALIS). The District Magistrate shall ensure that their respective databases are updated and information shared with corresponding District Police Authorities for compliance of ECI directives.
Immediately after the announcement of election, review of license holders – physical verification of arms in the district.
Depositing of arms and ban on issuing of new arms license after announcement of elections, as per the directions issued by Election Commission of India.
Ensuring 100% scrutiny of arms licenses and inventory of arm shops.
Seizure of illegal arms / ammunition, explosives, drugs, unaccounted cash etc.
Strict vigil and thorough checking of vehicles to ensure that no undesirable element or arms including ammunition are being transported from outside the state.
Gather intelligence regarding illegal manufacture, transport of arms, ammunition and liquor and take effective action.
Special drive against proclaimed offenders / absconders, bail jumpers, execution of Non-Bailable Warrants, drug smugglers, etc.
During the days of elections, action against smugglers and suppliers of drugs should further be intensified.
A zero tolerance policy should be adopted towards smuggling, supply and distribution of drugs amongst people / voters in the run up to the polling day.
Effective strengthening of ‘nakas’ at inter-state, inter-district & inter- national borders, if any, should be done to check the flow of drugs.
A special drive should be launched by the State Police within 120 days prior to the date of completion of term of the parliamentary/ legislative assembly to update the list of all proclaimed offenders/ absconders, parole jumpers.
Cases of forfeiture of illegally acquired properties of smugglers should be expedited and necessary liaison with Competent Authority, Government of India, should be effected for this purpose.
District level coordination meetings with following shall be ensured:
Commissioners of Police,Senior Superintendents of Police / Superintendents of Police / of adjacent districts of neighboring states (if any).
Intelligence setup of state & Central Government to elicit actionable intelligence.
District Magistrate cum District Election officer & other district level election functionaries.
Local State Excise authorities.
Local Income Tax authorities.
Municipal authorities to check illegal hoardings
Narcotic Control Bureau authorities, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, for action against drug smugglers.
Local authorities of the Directorate of Intelligence, Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Local Customs and Central Excise Authorities (if applicable).
State Health authorities & Chief Drug Controller of the State.
Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) officers
Sealing of International / State / District borders
Complete sealing of international borders (if any) and thus to have effective liaison with Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) guarding the border and other security agencies.
Deployment of strong ‘nakas’ where police personnel detailed shall be equipped with E-challan POS device and have easy access to online CCTNS database for instant verification of persons and vehicles under scrutiny and optimal usage of Human Resource and Modern Technology. These smart nakas at Inter State and Inter District entry and exit points have CCTV cameras installed capturing the entire procedure for record keeping and review. Provisions can be made for a one stop Smart Naka manned by representatives from other enforcement agencies like Excise Department, Transport Department, ANTF(Anti-Narcotics Task Force) unit for early intervention and prompt action as required.
Ensuring that roads coming from the border are effectively covered with deployment of force.
Installing CCTV camera surveillance system at all ‘nakas’ at the second line of defence all along the international border.
Providing security to election functionaries and others
Security to the candidates and observers will be provided by the CP/ SSP/SP (as the case may be) immediately after filing of nomination papers by the candidates as per assessment of threat, and not in routine manner.
It should be ensured that all Personal Security Officers (PSOs) deployed with candidates should be physically fit and in sound health. If any Personal Security Officer (PSO) proceeds on leave or falls sick, then,provide a substitute immediately and candidate/ observer should not be left without security at any point of time including night time.
The Commissioner of Police / Senior Superintendent of Police / Superintendent of Police (as the case may be) shall ensure that proper scaled ammunition is provided to the PSOs/gunmen of the candidate/ observer. He shall also be deputy Superintendent of Police rank officer as nodal officer for deployment and checking of security provided to the candidates / observers.
There should not be any scope of complacency on this issue.
DSP (Police Lines) including Reserve Inspector / Police Lines Officer of District should be deputed to take care of welfare needs of these Personal Security Officers (PSOs) especially those relating to food, water etc.
Make necessary security arrangements for regulating crowds and maintaining law and order during visits of star campaigners.
The Election Observers should be provided with adequate security.
Preparation of advance & comprehensive plan for security of threatened and categorized protectees.
Ensure that all visits of threatened dignitaries in his area of jurisdiction are completed in a peaceful manner.
Ensuring sufficient deployment of police for smooth completion of election rallies, street meetings, road shows etc.
Ensure that there is no scope for kidnapping / abduction of contesting candidates including their election agents, terrorist crime (target killing, IED explosion, bomb blasts etc.) mass killings, communal / caste / sectarian riots during election period.
Vulnerability mapping and identification of Critical Polling Stations
This exercise is crucial and should be conducted well in advance(6-4 months prior to the probable date of elections) so as to enable the State machinery to project CAPF requirements well in advance. To inhibit the unnecessary exaggeration in projections for requirements of CAPFs, the reasons for labeling a Polling Station as critical(vulnerable polling stations are also categorized as critical) or Normal should be mentioned clearly and approved by both SP and DC. Though the figures are not absolute, the initial projection shall indicate the requirement and plan fund accordingly. The vulnerability mapping and identification of critical polling locations should be done in coordination with the civilian sector incharge. Deputy Superintendent of Police, incharge of Sub Division, should also be deputed to have liaison with Sub Division Magistrate of the area for this exercise. A sector police officer should be deputed with a civilian sector officer to conduct vulnerable mapping exercises and identification of critical polling locations. (Manual on Vulnerability Mapping – 2023). Hence, in this regard following should be ensured:
To identify critical polling stations in coordination with District Magistrate cum District Election Officer and other election related functionaries.
To undertake various measures at Critical Polling Stations (PS) for securing elections i.e. ensuring proper deployment of force including Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) .
Ensuring that all the critical Polling Stations shall have Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) deployment and other NonCAPF measures (webcasting, micro-observer, videography, photography etc.) to safeguard the Polling Stations to the maximum possible extent.
The list of all such critical Polling Stations shall be given to the Commanding/Assistant Commanding Officers of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) so that they can keep a watch on such polling stations.
Polling parties should also be briefed about the vulnerable areas / critical polling Stations locations.
Security at Storage Centres / counting centres The electronic voting machines and other election related material are stored at strong rooms during the process of counting. Necessary liaison with District Magistrate-cum-District Election Officer, concerned should be made to ensure following:
Prepare a security plan for strong room and counting centres in consultation with the District Magistrate cum District Election Officer.
Two tier security cordon system to be set up at strong rooms, inner perimeter by CAPF and outer perimeter by SAP.
Three tier security cordon at counting centres, with Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) (1st cordon), State Armed Police (2nd cordon) and State Police (3rd cordon) for guarding counting centres after the poll.
Appropriate and strong barricading around strong rooms should be put in place.
The strong room should be in safe condition from a security point of view with adequate security.
A thorough physical and anti-sabotage check of the entire premises of the strong room along with the strong room should be done.
Two way uninterrupted power supply should be ensured to premises of buildings where electronic voting machines will be stored.
A standby electricity generator having an automatic turn on system should be provided at the campus of the building with strong room. Technically trained persons may be stationed near this campus in three shifts.
Proper lighting arrangements should be made in the entire premises of this building.
The boundary wall of the campus of this building should not be in damaged condition.
All gates of the campus should be manned.
Proper communication system including wireless sets should be installed in the campus of the building. A comprehensive communication plan should be prepared. Sentries and their incharges should be provided with walkie-talkie sets.
Foolproof fire fighting arrangements should be made at this place. Fire tenders (big & small) including portable fire extinguishers should be placed in the campus of this building.
Inspection of the entire premises should be conducted by the senior officers and during inspection it should be ensured that the building, electrical fittings and sanitary fitting, water supply, etc. of the building are in proper condition.
There should not be any chance of fire due to short circuits during the storage period. Officers in-charge shall be asked to conduct a detailed survey of electricity wirings and furnish a certificate of fitness of the same.
The local Municipal Authorities should also check all water pipes and sewage manholes to prevent flooding in the campus due to leaked pipes, etc.
Other duties of CP/SSP/SP as the case may be:
Ensure effective implementation of prohibitory orders issued by the competent authority u/s 144 CrPC especially those related to banning the carrying of licensed arms.
Ensuring effective preventive actions under relevant sections of law like 107/110 CrPC and other relevant provisions of law against identified sources of trouble.
Enforcement of laws for protection and defacement of property and regulation on loudspeakers, etc.
Regular intensive patrolling and checking of public places, like bus stands, Railway Stations, Hotels, lodges, weekly markets etc.
Intensive checking and patrolling throughout the area to check against electoral malpractices.
To compile a list of persons indulged in electoral offences during past elections and their disposal.
Updating list of history sheeters, criminals, musclemen, militants, declared absconders, fugitive and their arms deposition in case there is any license cancellation action as per law and Election Commission of India directions.
To give effect to the service of pending warrants / challans and updating list of pending warrants.
To expedite the investigation / prosecution of pending electoral offences
Unearthing of illicit liquor factories and illicit liquor distillation centres.
Regular reporting of preventive action, seizures of cash and liquor etc., review of the same and taking of corrective measures.
Ensuring that daily law and order reports for the district in format prescribed are to be sent to the State Police Nodal Officer for compilation and onward submission to the State Home Department.
Election related expenditure monitoring as per guidelines of Election Commission of India.
Role and responsibility of Sub Divisional Deputy Superintendent of
Police
DSP/Sub Division shall ensure the compliance of following:
Ensure that investigations of criminal cases, registered during previous elections in his area of jurisdiction are completed and chargesheet/ final report of the same have been submitted before competent authorities concerned.
Ensure that all Non Bailable Warrants related to the area of jurisdiction are executed, lists of proclaimed offenders / absconders, parole jumpers are compiled by Station House Officers (SHOs) concerned, look out circulars are issued and efforts are being made to arrest them.
Ensure that lists of potential trouble makers, goonda elements, hardened criminals, persons indulged in crime during last elections have been compiled by the Station House Officers (SHOs).
Ensure regular coordination meetings and sharing of important information with adjacent Sub Division and Districts.
Ensure meticulous compliance of directions issued by the higher authorities with respect to elections especially directions issued by the Election Commission of India.
Role and responsibility of officers incharge of Police Station (SHO)
-Officer-in-charge of a police station shall ensure compliance of following:
All pending investigations regarding criminal cases registered during previous elections to be completed.
Execution of non-bailable warrants and ensure that no such warrant is pending execution for more than ten days.
Compile a list of all proclaimed offenders/absconders pertaining to their respective police station and take necessary action.
Execution of preventive action to maintain peace during elections.
Analyze patterns of crime especially recent/past history of agitations, skirmishes between supporters of various political parties and list of potential troublemakers and initiate suitable preventive action against them.
Share information on inter-district illegal activities.
Regularly check security of candidates, political rallies, road shows, corner meetings, etc.
Ensure security of threatened dignitaries/categorized protectee who visits the jurisdiction for election campaign.
Ensure patrolling and regular checking of hotels, sarais, dharamshalas, etc. Where criminals, antisocial elements, etc. generally stay.
Ensure security of observers, election officers, etc. visits his area of jurisdiction.
To immediately visit the scene of crime, especially those related to elections.
Ensure functioning of ‘nakas’ at inter district/state links and ensure round the clock checking at these ‘nakas’.
Ensure all roads, link roads and ‘kutcha’ tracks having inter-state/ inter-district links are covered with deployment of sufficient numbers of force.
Intensive checking of vehicles at these ‘naka’ points should be carried out during this period.
Check that the CCTV surveillance system installed at these ‘nakas’ is functional round the clock.
To identify the pocket of areas which are crime infested and drug peddler infested and to provide round the clock police patrolling/ police fixed picketing.
STATE/DISTRICT SECURITY DEPLOYMENT PLAN
The State Deployment Plan factors in the requirements of different districts based on District Deployment Plans which is to be prepared by every district taking into account the forces being made available by the State Government to the district, the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) and other forces being made available from the State pool to the district and the available forces with the district. At the state level, this plan is to be prepared by the SPNO/State force Coordinator, separately for LWE and Non LWE areas/ constituencies, in consultation with the CEO. State plan is a compilation of District plan. The Plan shall enlist the role and duties of officers involved in election. It shall include assessment of forces, logistics, communication equipment, security equipment etc. It shall contain training schedule for forces, pre-induction training of all forces, requisition of helicopter/air ambulance/sat phones and strategic plan for communication shadow zone area, regular meeting with Telecom Department, BSNL and other TSPs.
The District Deployment Plan shall be formulated and finalised by the District Magistrate/District Election Officer and Superintendent of Police / Commissioner of Police concerned.
The Observer appointed by the Election Commission of India on his arrival to the district shall be briefed by the District Magistrate and Senior Superintendent of Police / Superintendent of Police / Commissioner of Police and the views of the Observer if any should be considered.
Both the State Deployment Plan and District Deployment Plan would be finalised well in advance before the day of poll.It shall ensure the following:
Full and optimal utilisation of CAPFs and SAPs to be ensured.
District Deployment Plan - To be prepared by DEO and SP jointly and shall be vetted by Senior Most General and Police observers jointly.
Preparation of local deployment plan based on state plan– containing micro-detailing and based on local situation/ requirements
To ensure that there is no deviation without express prior approval of the Senior Most General/Police Observer.
CAPF must not be deployed in less than half section strength in critical polling booths in normal areas, whereas in Naxal affected/ Disturbed areas in critical polling booths, the minimum strength should not be less than 1 section
The plan should have a sketch map of each sector and identify vulnerable pockets and critical PSs.
Security cover to contesting candidates to be provided only as per assessment of threat, and not in routine manner.
Three tier cordoning system to be set up in counting centers.
Sealing of inter-state borders/inter district borders, well in advance.
Deployment of CAPF for guarding strong rooms after the poll.
Deploying forces at the PSs in the following order of sensitivity - CAPF followed by SAP followed by DAP.
To ensure additional measures/force multipliers at critical polling stations.
Arranging logistics for the security forces
Arranging the Training and briefing of 100 % personnel
Preparing in advance day to day plans of utilisation of central forces for area domination from their date of arrival; giving a schedule of all areas to be covered.
Ensuring complete implementation of district deployment plans.
To recapitulate, the process for preparing state level and district level deployment plan, consists of following stepsa) Assessment of local situation and requirements by the district machinery
Interaction of the CEO office and Nodal officers’ law and order with the district machinery to assess requirements
Collecting of data related to criticality/vulnerability, availability of resources, communication shadow areas, low voter turnout areas, low female voter turnout areas, trouble spots, manpower availability, etc. from districts
Preparing database of above at state level
Preparing an indicative deployment plan at state level showing tentative allocation of state police forces
Holding discussions with district machinery on the basis of the indicative plan
Firming up state deployment plan and issuing indicative plan for district level clearly spelling out the minimum deployment for static, mobile, police station and reserve deployments
Allocating central forces (once the same is intimated by the
ECI) on the basis of the above discussions
The plan is prepared in such a manner that:
● No central force personnel are kept reserve
● At least 80 % of the State Police forces are utilised
● Maximum central forces personnel are deployed for static duties at Polling stations
● Critical PS are covered by central forces
● Home Guards and related forces are utilised for the purpose of maintenance of queues at PS, while state police personnel are deployed for maintenance of law and order.
In the District Deployment Plan, it shall be ensured that all polling stations are covered with adequate static duty forces reinforced by necessary mobile patrolling at the level of “zones” and “sectors”. Particular attention should be paid to deploy Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) in expenditure sensitive constituencies and Law and Order sensitive constituencies and polling stations identified as critical and those falling in vulnerable areas according to vulnerable mapping carried out by District Magistrate cum District Election Officer. At the district level, this plan is prepared by the DM and SP, separately for LWE and non LWE areas ( if any)
Deployment of any force other than State’s own uniformed police force or the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs), (for example, Village Defense Force, Home guards, Forest Guards Ad Hoc Auxiliary force etc.) will require prior approval of the commission.
The arrangements for security of contesting candidates, according to the perception of threat to their lives should also be made and the contesting candidates provided with the security after an assessment of the threat by the Committee at state level. It is vital to note and follow that security should not be provided in a routine manner. All relevant factors must be considered and taken into account. Also ensuring meticulous compliance of directions of Hon’ble Election Commission of India regarding security of threatened persons and star campaigners as circulated from time to time.
The Observers appointed by the Commission should also be provided with adequate security.
The deployment of forces within the district and at the polling booths as per the district deployment plan shall be the responsibility of the concerned District Chief (CP/SSP/SP as the case may be) of Police and officers below him.
The State government shall provide adequate facilities and make necessary arrangements as needed, for transport and accommodation of the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) deployed.
MAINTENANCE OF LAW & ORDER DURING ELECTIONS PREVENTIVE MEASURES, LOR I & II
Preventive measures related to Law & Order Action to ensure conduct of peaceful, free and fair poll during the General Elections / Bye elections – Instruction No. 464 / INST/2023/EPS, Dated: 08.06.2023
PREVENTIVE LAW AND ORDER ACTIONS:
The DEO and SP shall initiate preventive measures to ensure that intimidation/ obstruction does not happen during elections. Confidence- building measures such as guarding of vulnerable locations, area domination etc. point patrolling, undertaking visits to meet vulnerable communities, tracking should be initiated to bolster the voters’ confidence about the arrangements for free and fair poll. CAPF, in combination with State Police, shall be extensively used for patrolling and confidence building activities before poll day and for safeguarding polling stations and material on poll day and post poll duration.
Vulnerability Mapping exercise shall be initiated and continuously carried out as provided in the relevant Manual on the subject.
A special drive shall be launched by every Superintendents of Police/ Commissioners of Police 6 (six) months prior to the probable date of elections (as an estimate take date and month of the poll day of the last relevant General Election) to:
Compile a list of all such persons indulged in electoral offences like booth capturing, intimidation, impersonation in each police station of each and every constituency during the past Parliamentary and State Assembly elections.
Compile a list of history sheeters, declared absconders, fugitive criminals in each police station falling in each and every Parliamentary/ Assembly Constituency
Effect the service of all pending warrants in each police station of each and every Parliamentary/Assembly Constituency promptly and monitor regularly.
Expedite the investigation and prosecution of all electoral offences registered in previous elections in each police station of each and every Parliamentary and Assembly Constituency and a fortnightly report be made available to the District Election Officers concerned and shall be forwarded to the Commission as and when asked for.
Compile a list of persons reported to have indulged in the offences under SC and ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 during past elections and initiate actions as required.
The above activities shall be reviewed weekly at SP/CP level for initiation of preventive measures for a conducive environment during elections.
BAN ON SALE OF LIQUOR:
Section 135C of Representation of the People Act, 1951 provides that no spirituous, fermented or intoxicating liquor or other substances of like nature shall be sold, given or distributed at a hotel, eating house, tavern, shop or any other place, private or public, within a polling area during the period of 48 hours ending with the hour fixed for conclusion of poll for any election in the polling area. Therefore, ‘Dry Day’ shall be declared and notified under relevant State Laws for the stipulated period for the poll areas.
The day on which counting of votes is to be taken up, shall also be declared ‘Dry Day’.State Governments need to issue comprehensive instructions to all concerned authorities to take appropriate legal measures to ensure strict compliance of the said provision.
Special drives shall be launched to keep a check on inter-State flow of illicit liquor and unearth illicit liquor making factories and all restrictions provided in State Excise Law or any other Laws on the storage of liquor in unlicensed premises shall be vigorously enforced. In such a drive, all relevant law enforcement agencies shall initiate coordinated efforts.
BAN ON CARRYING OF LICENSED ARMS-
Prohibitory orders under section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 shall be issued banning the carrying of licensed arms as soon as an election is announced and such ban should be made effective till the declaration of results.
The authorities shall conduct a 100% scrutiny of licences of arms and ammunition shops with a view to ensuring that the records of their stocks are kept up-to-date. Their antecedents, recent involvement in irregularities, variation in business transactions and political leanings, if any, warrant a close checking and monitoring during the days of active electioneering.
BAN ON ISSUE OF LICENSE OF ARMS-
Issue of license for arms should be prohibited during the period commencing with the date of announcement of elections. This ban will continue to be operative till the completion of the election as notified.
SEIZURE OF UNLICENSED ARMS AND AMMUNITIONS-
A special drive shall be launched to unearth and seize unlicensed arms and ammunition. A very thorough regular search and seizure by the State Police of unlicensed arms and places of indigenous manufacturer of arms and ammunition or underground arms factories shall be carried out and persons involved shall be arrested according to the legal provisions. While unearthing and seizure of unlicensed weapons is a normal ongoing responsibility of the police, it shall be vigorously intensified during the election period. Inter- State and Intrastate movements of trucks and commercial vehicles shall be strictly checked with a view to preventing smuggling of arms, ammunition and anti-social elements. Close inter-state coordination shall be established, as required.
DEPOSIT OF LICENSED ARMS-
Immediately after the announcement of elections, District Magistrates shall make a detailed and individual review and assessment, in accordance with the prevalent State laws, of all license holders so that licensed arms in those cases where they consider it essential are impounded in order to ensure maintenance of law and order and conduct of free and fair elections. The cases which may need inter alia special review are:
Arms licence of persons released on bail, (ii). Arms licence of persons having a history of criminal offences, (iii). Arms licence of persons previously involved in rioting at any time but especially during the election period.
Arms license of persons involved in election offences of any kind; 3.6.2 The Hon’ble High Court of Bombay in CWP No.835 of 2009 (Sh Govind Vs. Vikram Kumar, Distt Magistrate & Others) vide order dated 10th July 2009 had laid down procedure for review and assessment of all license holders, which needs to be followed scrupulously, as follows:
There shall be a Screening Committee in every District and in every Police Commissionerate area. In the District, the Screening Committee shall consist of the District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police. In the Commissionerate area, it shall consist of the Commissioner of Police and Joint/ Additional Commissioner of Police (Administration).
The Screening Committee shall commence the work of screening of all arms licences from the day of announcement of election by the Election Commission and it shall complete the exercise of screening, as far as possible, before the date of issue of notification of elections.
Cases of all licence holders as mentioned in above para of 3.6.1 shall also be placed before the Screening Committee.
On receipt of report from the Screening Committee, the licensing authority shall issue notice before the last date fixed for withdrawal of candidature to the individual license holder for depositing his arms and inform to the license holder that failure to deposit the arms as directed would result in prosecution under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code.
The licence holders, thereafter, shall deposit their arms forthwith and in any case within a period of seven days from the date of receipt of the notice.
The decision taken by the Screening Committee shall be final.
Any licence holder who fails to deposit arms within the period specified above shall be liable for prosecution under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code.
The District Administration or Commissioner of Police shall ensure fool proof arrangements for keeping the deposited firearms in safe custody.
Proper receipt must be given to the licence holders depositing their firearms. District Administration or the Commissionerate of Police shall ensure that all firearms deposited are returned to the licence holders immediately after one week of the date of declaration of results.
Sportsmen who are the members of National Rifle Association, at different levels and have to participate in various sporting events in which they use their rifles, will be exempted from these restrictions. This ban shall also not be applicable to those communities who are entitled to display weapons by long standing law, custom and usage. This shall, however, not prevent the District Administration to impound weapons of any person, even from such communities, if they are found to be indulging in violence or posing a threat to the maintenance of law and order and peaceful conduct of elections. In such cases also, the seized firearms shall remain impounded till one week after the declaration of results.
TRANSPORTATION OF ARMS AND AMMUNITIONS:
Strict vigil shall be maintained by police, thorough checking of lorries, light vehicles and all other vehicles, preferably by setting up equipped check posts, from the day of announcement of elections to ensure that no undesirable elements or arms and ammunition are being transported into the constituency from outside and to apprehend them and take appropriate action under law if they are doing so.
Such checking of vehicles shall continue till the completion of the counting of votes and the declaration of results.
It is clarified that the Commission has not banned supply of arms and ammunition from one State to another. However, such transfers should only be on the basis of valid papers, including ‘No Objection Certificates’ from the respective District Magistrates/ Commissioners of Police, as applicable in laws. The state authorities supplying the consignment of arms and ammunition shall inform the concerned authorities of the States wherein the supplies of arms and ammunition are sent so as to take advance action for remitting the consignment to the actual consignee. It is desirable to provide such vehicles with Global Positioning System for surveillance. All care should be taken to ensure that trucks, lorries etc. carrying arms and ammunition to other States should reach the actual consignee and not find their way into the hands of unauthorized persons. Therefore, trucks and other commercial vehicles shall be vigorously checked at inter-state borders with a view to preventing smuggling of arms and ammunition. The State authorities supplying the consignment shall inform the concerned authorities of the States wherein the supplies of arms and ammunition are sent so as to take advance action to provide adequate security for remitting the consignment to the actual consignee.
DISPLAY OF ARMS:
Display of arms in procession in support of a candidate during campaign period is tantamount to threat and intimidation to voters at elections. The Commission directs that no individual or group of persons can be allowed to display arms during a procession or any meeting in support of a candidate, under any circumstances. All meetings/processions for campaigning activity should be videographed for surveillance purpose and inter alia detect any violations of this direction.
ENTRY OF PERSONS WITH SPECIAL SECURITY COVER IN POLLING STATIONS/COUNTING CENTERS:
The CPT (Close Protection Team) with arms will follow the protectee to the door of the polling booth or the counting hall as the case may be, thereafter, only one Personal Security Officer with concealed firearms will accompany the protectee inside the polling booth and will locate himself so as to provide requisite cover to the Protectee without interfering with the proceedings, in any way, inside the polling station.
PROHIBITION ON MISUSE OF SHORT MESSAGE SERVICES (SMSs) AND OTHER SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS:
The Commission is aware of the fact that persons with vested interests may transmit objectionable messages through SMSs or other Social Media platforms which may vitiate the process of elections by violating the election laws, model code of conduct and instructions issued by the Commission in the regard. To ensure that elections are conducted in free, fair and peaceful manner, the Commission has issued the following directions:
Police authorities should advertise special mobile numbers on which the receiver of such messages can forward the said messages along with the number of the sender(s). An appropriate inquiry shall be initiated by the police authorities and after tracing original sender of such messages, suitable action shall be taken under relevant provisions of Indian Penal Code, Representation of the People Act, 1951, Conduct of Election Rules, 1961, instructions/directions issued by the Commission and any other law applicable.
During 48 hours ending with the hour fixed for conclusion of poll, there shall be no transmission of bulk messages of political nature.
Bulk messages transmitted during campaign period will be brought to notice of CEO by Returning Officers or District Election Officers and the cost be apportioned to election expenditure of candidate(s) concerned.
Mobile Service Providers shall also be appropriately briefed and directed about the sensitivities involved and legal provisions.
PREVENTION ON CARRYING OF MOBILE, SMART PHONES ETC WITHIN PROHIBITED AREA:
The Commission has prohibited carrying of mobile phones, smart phones, wireless sets etc. inside the polling stations on the day of poll and Counting Centres on the day of counting. However, Presiding Officers will be allowed to carry their phones in silent mode and use only for communication with Sector Officers, Returning Officers and Observers in case of necessity and exigency. These instructions will also not apply to the officers in charge of law and order, security personnel put on duty, Observers appointed by the Commission, election authorities and officers in charge of counting at Counting Centres.
RESTRICTION ON PRESENCE OF POLITICAL FUNCTIONARIES IN A CONSTITUENCY AFTER CAMPAIGN PERIOD IS OVER:
Under Section 126 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in the period of 48 hours ending with the hour fixed for the close of poll (silence period), the campaigning activities shall come to an end.
During the course of campaign, political parties mobilize their supporters, including from outside the constituency, in order to bolster their campaign. In view of the fact of closure of campaign period, no campaign activities shall take place within the constituency in the last 48 hours, as specified. Political functionaries/party workers/ procession functionaries/campaign functionaries etc., who have been brought from outside the constituency and who are not voters of the constituency, should not continue to remain present in the constituency as their continued presence, after end of the campaign period, may undermine or vitiate eco-system required for free and fair election.
The Commission has directed that after the end of campaign period, the district administration/police administration shall ensure that all such functionaries leave the constituency immediately after the beginning of silence period. However, the said restriction may not be insisted upon during the General Elections to Lok Sabha/State Legislative Assembly in respect of office bearer of Political Party who is in charge of the State. Such office bearer of the political party shall declare his place of stay in the State headquarters and his movement during the period in question shall remain confined normally between his party office and his place of stay.
Above mentioned directions on silence period shall be brought to the notice of all political parties, contesting candidates and their agents to comply with the directions.
The Commission further directs that the district administration/ police may take all necessary measures, to scrupulously implement this direction, which inter alia may include:
Checking of marriage halls/ community halls etc., where such people are kept housed and find out whether any outsiders have been accommodated in these premises.
Verification of hotels, lodges and guesthouses to keep a track of the list of occupants.
Set up check posts in the constituency borders and track the vehicular movement from outside the constituency.
Verify the identity of the people/group of people in order to find out whether they are voters or not and establish their identity.
VIGIL ON JAIL INMATES:
To eliminate any possibility of undue influence on peaceful, free and fair election from politically connected jail inmates, the Commission has directed that district administration shall take following measures:
The District Magistrates shall regularly inspect the jails and ensure that the provisions of the Jail Manual are followed scrupulously.
He shall submit a weekly report confirming that the inmates are not given access to cell phones etc. and that the provisions of the Jail Manual are followed scrupulously by the jail authorities in all respects, particularly the visits of outsiders to meet the jail inmates.
Identified jail inmates should not be allowed to meet visitors every day to prevent them to hold virtual election meetings and discuss election related issues from inside the jails.
The transfer of inmates during election process shall be monitored and, unless specific order of the competent court, the transfer of inmates shall not be done. In case of any such transfer needed for any justifiable reasons, prior information to the Chief Electoral Officer shall be given who in turn will seek the approval of the Commission.
ACTION TO BE TAKEN FOR ELECTORAL OFFENCES:
The following action inter alia shall be ensured:
Strict action shall be taken against any electoral offenders. List of electoral offences may be referred in commission’s instruction dated 8th June, 2023.
Compile all the criminal cases lodged in the course of conduct of elections. The Commission has directed that the last date for launching of prosecution of all cases relating to electoral offences should be one month from the date of completion of elections. Close monitoring shall be done by District Election Officer and Superintendent of Police/ Commissioner of Police.
The Commission has fixed the same period by which enquiries on complaints received or referred by the Commission, during the conduct of the elections, should be completed.
No such case shall be withdrawn by the State Government without the prior concurrence of the Election Commission of India.
Monthly report in Proforma as mentioned in commission’s instruction dated 8th June, 2023 (Electoral Offences Report) about the status of electoral offence cases in which FIRs have been lodged should be furnished to the Commission. Such Monthly Report shall also be provided on Election Planning Portal by the Chief Electoral Officers.
LAW AND ORDER REPORT:
The Chief Secretary shall arrange, immediately after announcement of election till completion of election, for compilation of daily law & order report for each district in format prescribed in commission’s instruction dated 8th June, 2023 (Law and Order Report-I) and for its transmission to the Chief Electoral Officer. District authorities should not send this report directly to the ECI. The Chief Secretary shall also arrange for compilation of a consolidated report for the State in another format mentioned in Commission’s instruction dated 8th June, 2023 (Law and Order ReportII) by the Home Department. These reports should be sent to the Chief Electoral Officer, who in turn shall forward it with his/her comments to the Commission. Law and Order Report-II shall also be furnished by the Chief Electoral Officer on Election Planning Portal for the specified period.

CRITICAL POLLING STATIONS AND VULNERABILITY
MAPPING EXERCISE
The exercise of identifying Critical Polling Stations and vulnerability mapping is carried out before and during election period to create a conducive environment for every elector to access the polling station without any fear or favour. To safeguard such polling stations identified as critical and vulnerable CAPF and non CAPF measures are deployed so that elections are conducted in a safe and peaceful environment.This chapter discusses the concept of vulnerability mapping and critical polling stations.(Refer to manual on vulnerability mapping-2023)
VULNERABILITY MAPPING
Vulnerability Mapping (VM) in the context of elections is the exercise of identifying, in advance, such voters or section of voters who are likely to be “vulnerable”, the persons or other factors causing such vulnerability and/ or to identify the villages / hamlets / habitats and segments of electorate vulnerable to any threat, intimidation or interference against the free exercise of electoral right and taking adequate corrective action well in advance on the basis of such identification.
Vulnerability - The susceptibility of any voter or section of voters, to being wrongfully prevented from or influenced upon in relation to the exercise of his right to vote in a free and fair manner, through intimidation including bribing of voters in cash/kind or use of any kind of undue influence or force on the voter.
DESIGNATED OFFICERS AND THEIR ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES RELATED TO VULNERABILITY MAPPING –
Sector Officer
Sector officer is a senior officer of the district appointed by the District Election Officer to supervise 10-12 Polling Stations in the Assembly Constituency that can be covered in 1 to 2 hours.
Sector Officer should be appointed four months before the date of poll of the last elections.
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Pre-Poll Responsibilities
Identification of village, hamlets and segments of voters vulnerable to threat and intimidation.
Identification of persons responsible for making the voters/areas vulnera- ble at each polling station indicating the name of village, hamlet, potential trouble makers, contact number, addresses etc.
Frequent visits to the identified hamlets/persons for confidence building of the voters.
Acting as sector magistrate for their designated area till the poll process is complete.
Preparation of sector management plan
The Sector Officer shall do the exercise of vulnerability mapping jointly with the Sector Police Officer and submit the reports in Format VM-2 and VM-3 related to vulnerable localities/pockets/voter segments and list of intimida- tors etc. signed by him along with the Sector Officer.
POLL-DAY RESPONSIBILITIES
Visit to the village/hamlets/persons identified as vulnerable atleast once on the poll day to check if they are voting or not and pay special attention towards the turnout of voters of such an area.
Sector Police Officer
Sector Police Officer is a Police Officer from the police station area of the Sector to be appointed by the SP of the district from the available officers not below the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector/Head Constable
Sector Police Officer should be appointed four months before the date of poll of the last elections.
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Pre-Poll Responsibilities
Sector Police Officer shall do the exercise of vulnerability mapping jointly with the Sector Officer and submit the reports in Format VM-2 and VM-3 related to vulnerable localities/pockets/voter segments and list of intimida- tors etc. signed by him along with the Sector Officer.
The Sector Police Officer along with Sector Officer shall take confidence building measures and provide adequate security to the vulnerable voters wherever required.
POLL-DAY RESPONSIBILITIES
Sector Police Officer should visit to the village/hamlets/persons identified as vulnerable at least once on the poll day to check if they are voting or not and pay special attention towards the turnout of voters of such areas.
Designated Police Officer for Vulnerability Mapping
Designated Police Officer is a Specific Officer of the concerned police station designated for monitoring the identified trouble makers.
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
The Designated Police Officer from the jurisdictional police station shall tar- get the individual trouble mongers and keep a watch over them for ensuring proper law and order and peaceful poll.
Role of Returning Officer
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Shall combine all the information received by sector officers and prepare report in VM-4 format which is a summary of vulnerability report and list of persons causing vulnerability. This exercise should be done within five days of announcement of elections.
Regularly interact with the candidates and representatives of political par- ties to gather feed back of vulnerable areas/people.
Focus awareness campaigns in the identified areas under vulnerability mapping to supervise the activities of sector officer in vulnerable areas.
Special focus on the vulnerable areas/people on the day of poll to ensure free and fair election.
District Election Officer
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
To consolidate Format VM-4 sent by ROs and consolidate it in VM-5 to send to CEO within seven days of announcement of elections.
Appointing the Sector Officers and arranging training for Sector Officer and Sector Police Officer.
Preparing focussed action plan along with SP of the district to deal with the potential threats and intimidation points identified.
To take up confidence building measures in the identified areas and visit along with SP and Observers to instil confidence among local people.
To take up targeted ethical voting awareness campaigns in such areas and carry out surveillance by FSs/SSTs/VVTs.
Superintendent of Police
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
To appoint the Sector Police Officers and Designated Police Officers and arrange training for them.
Ensuring coordination between Sector Officer and Sector Police Officer for timely completion of VM exercise.
Preparing a focussed action plan as per vulnerability mapping and coordi- nating with the DEO and RO for confidence building in such areas.
Coordinating with CAPF for monitoring the identified areas under vulnera- bility mapping.
CRITICAL POLLING STATIONS:
The critical polling stations are those polling stations which have been identified as critical as per the objective criteria prescribed by the ECI, which require special attention or enhanced security measures such as deployment of sufficient CAPF personnel or provide additional civil measures like webcasting etc. in order to create a secured environment for conduct of elections. One of such objective criteria for determining any Polling Station to be a Critical Polling Station is presence of vulnerable pockets/hamlets/ villages etc. in that Polling Station or Polling Station located in identified vulnerable areas. Therefore, all Polling Stations identified under Vulnerability Mapping shall be designated as Critical Polling Stations.
The critical polling stations are identified by the DEO/RO in consultation with the SP/DSP as per the prescribed objective criteria of ECI and is finally approved by the Senior most General and Police Observers.
Timeline - Identification of the Critical polling station should be completed 45 days before the date of poll and should be approved as soon as the Observers arrive in the districts.
Objective Criteria for Identification of Critical Polling Stations-
PSs having vulnerable pockets and PSs located in identified vulnerable area.
PSs where polling was more than 90% and where more than 75% of votes have been polled in favour of one candidate in the last election.
PSs where polling is less than 10%
PSs where Re-poll conducted owing to vitiation of poll process and electoral offences such as booth capturing, during any election for Lok Sabha or State Legislative Assembly in last five years
PSs where any sort of violence took place on poll day leading to lodging of FIR, during any election for Lok Sabha or State Legislative Assembly in the last five years.
PSs with higher than constituency average % of Absentee, Shifted and Dead (ASD) voters (Ref: Constituency Average % of ASD Voters=Total number of ASD Voters in the constituency/ Total number of polling station)
Information regarding abnormal law and order situations in any particular area.
Measures to be taken for critical Polling Stations.
All critical Polling Stations shall have CAPF deployment to safeguard the Polling Stations to the maximum possible extent.
The list of all such critical Polling Stations shall be given to the Commanding/Assistant Commanding Officers of CAPF so that they can keep a watch on such Polling Stations.
Deployment of webcasting or videography and any other monitoring system such as Micro Observer shall be positioned in the Polling Station as a civil measure. Webcasting shall be done in all critical polling stations
Critical events in and around the polling station shall also be video graphed.
The Presiding Officer of critical Polling Station shall be specifically briefed to ensure that the EPIC/ approved identification documents, if any, are properly verified and reflected in the ‘Remarks’ column of Form 17 A.
It is to be noted that during elections, no press conference of any kind shall be held to furnish any type of details relating to critical Polling Stations, Vulnerability Mapping exercise, vulnerable areas, deployment of security forces etc. Field machinery shall be sensitized in this regard. Any information to the media about vulnerability, if required, would be given only by the Commission or by the Chief Electoral Officers of the State/ UTs concerned on instructions of the Commission.
TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION PLAN
Seamless movement of security forces, logistics, polling parties and others is very crucial for any election related plan and it needs a thorough planning, execution to manage the vast logistical requirements. Planning of transportation is one of the most crucial features in conducting electoral processes.
Commission’s Instruction on use of vehicles during elections No.464/L&O/2023/ EPS dated 26th June 2023 may also be referred to while preparing a transportation plan.
A detailed transportation plan is a prerequisite for effective performance of election duties.The transportation plan needs to be prepared separately for normal areas and for extremism/ LWE affected, inaccessible areas with challenging terrain. Following measures are required for developing a full proof transportation plan.
Creation of District Transportation Cell
Apart from the dedicated transportation cell under DEO, a separate district transportation cell headed at least by a DySP rank officer needs to be constituted by the SP consisting of Reserve Sergeant Major (transport) and sufficient staff to coordinate and control the issues related to the transportation of the forces and their logistics.
Duties of District Transport Cell:
Coordinate and communicate with different stakeholders like DTOs, RTOs, Railways & Airport authorities, incoming CAPF and external forces to assess the need of different types of vehicles.
Assess the deficit or surplus of different types of vehicles depending upon the availability in the district. In case of a deficit of vehicles, coordination with the district transport cell under DEO has to be done.
Calculate the budgetary need for fuel, maintenance of vehicles and daily allowances of drivers and cleaners of private vehicles engaged for election related duties.
Issues related to maintenance of vehicles, management related to drivers, support staffs and timely disbursement of dues.
Communicate with all nodal officers for assessing the need for special tasks like VIP security, special area requirements and evacuation plans.
Briefing of drivers, support staffs and nodal officers and circulation of important contact numbers to all concerned.
Assessment of logistics (number & type of vehicles needed) For assessment of number & types of vehicles needed, following points should be taken into account: -
No. of polling stations and polling station locations.
Polling booths/ sector/ zonal/ sub zonal and other poll related parties
Terrain and routes
External forces (CAPF) available and internal forces mobilized.
VIP duties to be carried out
Availability of vehicles (quality and quantity of vehicles)
No. of driver, cleaners and supporting staffs available (departmental as well as private)
Number of phases of election and inter phase deployment/movement.
Number & type of vehicles for CAPF/Other external forces In general, the transportation of CAPF from outside the state is to be coordinated by CAPF with the Railways Ministry and the State Government concerned. Transportation of CAPF, interstate and intrastate, for deployment in the state is the state government’s responsibility. Similarly, transportation of state police personnel and SAP for deployment within state, transportation for monitoring MCC, EEM, political campaigns/rallies, and transportation for ensuring general law and order, has to be taken care of by the state government. Regarding the deployment of CAPF Coys in the State, State administration must plan the availability of following: -
Transportation for 1 Coy in a Battalion
Sl. Strength Vehicle required Quantity
For 01 Coy of CAPF/ SAP/IRB Bus (52) Seater 02
Truck for Officers 01 Truck & 01 personal vehicles for movement
Medium Vehicle 01
Light Vehicle 01 in case of deployment is less than 01 sec, 03light vehicles @ 01per platoon would be additional required for effective supervision 03
For HQ TAC Bus (25-Seater) 01
Medium Vehicle 01
Light Vehicle 03
For Mahila Troops Maintaining female dignity vehicles to be pr ovided
Prior meeting of different stakeholders
Before elections, convening meetings involving different stakeholders like DTOs, RTOs, transport officials, lorry/bus association representatives, representatives of fuel supply agencies and travel agency representatives is essential.
Planning for special areas (LWE/extremists affected/ inaccessible and tough terrains) In remote, challenging, LWE/extremism infested & hilly terrain, operational hurdles exist for force deployment. Maintaining vehicles in good condition is essential. Additionally, vulnerable areas demand anti-landmine and special vehicles for area-specific challenges. Factors like secure transport for Security forces, Polling Parties, sensitive materials, medical emergencies and accessibility considerations should guide the allocation of vehicles.
Assessing the need of area specific vehicles for LWE/extremism infestedareas & tough, hilly terrains during elections is crucial. Such vehicles are: -
LMPVs/MMPVs and Bullet proof vehicles: - LMPVs/MMPVs and bullet proof vehicles are essential in naxal prone/extremist affected areas. The requirement of LMPV/MMPV and BP vehicles has to be assessed in advance. External forces specially CAPFs should be encouraged to report with LMPV/MMPV and BP vehicles if available with them.
JCB- JCBs play a vital role in addressing unforeseen situations during elections. They clear road debris, create ramps for accessibility and tackle challenges caused by weather or infrastructure issues, thus ensuring smooth material and personnel transportation.
Ambulance (Normal/Special/Bike)-Ambulances symbolize readiness. Equipped with life-saving gear, they offer swift medical aid during emergencies at polling sites or rallies, enhancing safety for voters, officials, and participants, and embodying a commitment to well- being. Bike ambulances are best suited for medical contingency and evacuation in far-flung and tough terrains.
Towing Vehicles- Tow trucks are crucial for smooth & continuous flow of traffic. They quickly address breakdowns of vehicles transporting materials, officials or voters thus, preventing disruptions. By removing obstacles, they maintain schedules and prevent delays, vital for uninterrupted momentum.
Tractors & bikes: Tractors and bikes are also very useful during the elections in remote and tough terrain areas.
Need and availability of special vehicles has to be minutely assessed and the operators for special vehicles have to be earmarked accordingly.
Helicopter planning for inaccessible and LWE/extremism affected areas and for emergency evacuation
Helicopter requirement assessment:
Determine the need for specific make and type of helicopters well in advance, considering actual field requirements and the availability of secure helipads.
Submit the proposal to the CEO’s office in advance.
Trial landings and helipad modifications:
If necessary, conduct trial landings at least 15 days prior to the polling day. This allows sufficient time for any required modifications to the helipads to be completed.
Efficient resources allocation:
Requisitions for sorties to transport EVMs and troops must reach the State Police Nodal Officer’s office at least 10 days before the polling day.
This timeframe facilitates effective planning and allocation of necessary resources.
Adherence to Standard Operating Procedure (SOP):
DEOs and SPs are responsible for ensuring strict adherence to the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP). This ensures consistent and proper execution of procedures as already provided to their respective offices.
Preparation of route map
Detailed route map (both written/ descriptive as well as pictorial) needs to be prepared for all the incoming forces as an integral part of the transportation plan. It should cover all details right from the first point of disembarkation/ deboarding from the railway station/ airports etc. to the district where the forces are deployed. Within the district of deployment, it should cover all details regarding routes to their places of stay, to the dispatch centres, clusters, booths & to the strong room.
It should cover details regarding distances between various places, nature and quality of roads (e.g. metalled, kutchcha, village roads etc), bridges, culverts, diversions, blind/black spots, accident prone areas, traffic congestion prone areas, bottlenecks etc. It should also contain details regarding available petrol pumps, hospitals, police stations, pickets/ outposts/ camps, government buildings enroute.
In extremist/ LWE affected areas it should include details on ambush prone sites, IED prone areas & details on any previous incident etc.
It should also contain important contact numbers of police stations, hospitals, emergency contact numbers which might be helpful for forces in case of emergency.
Execution of transportation plan
Provision of appropriate transport by state authorities
State authorities are responsible for ensuring that troops are provided with roadworthy transportation that meets laid-out guidelines upon their arrival at deboarding stations and for their subsequent deployment.
Fuel-efficient vehicles ready at railway stations
Vehicles for transportation should be ready at railway stations with full fuel tanks and made available to the companies (Coys).
Arrangement of spare vehicles for contingencies
Arrange spare vehicles along the route to address any unforeseen situations that may arise.
Identification and creation of vehicle pool and fuel distribution centres
Identify or create a pool of vehicles in good mechanical condition and establish multiple fuel distribution centres for efficient operations. In such a situation where scarcity of vehicles arises, maintain a vehicle pool.
Setting up re-fuelling stations in districts with high deployment
States should designate or establish several re-fuelling stations in districts where a significant number of companies (Coys) are deployed.
Essential support personnel and equipment
Equip each company (Coy) with a spare driver, an automotive mechanic, and frequently used spare parts. The transportation of forces is done extensively between two phases.
Inter-phase transportation of troops is done extensively between two phases.This transportation and the movement of the forces need to be pre- planned taking into account the distance between different places of two different phases. All the vehicles must be pre fuelled and all the logistics has to be pre ready with a local liaisoning officer where the forces are being relocated for next phases. This support setup can prove invaluable in Inter phases transportation of troops and others.
Briefing of drivers, support staffs and nodal officers The drivers, support staff, liaison officers, nodal officers must be briefed prior to embarking.
Use of signage and modern techniques should be encouraged
Use of modern navigation techniques like digital maps, creation of social media groups for communication amongst stakeholders including drivers use of placards and posters showing destination and vehicle no. should be encouraged.
COMMUNICATION PLAN
Background:
Multiplicity of activities at national, state, district and polling station level is an important feature of general elections in India. A robust and thoroughly tested communication plan is of immense help for the success of the electoral process. It should be prepared well in advance.Tracking and monitoring of multifarious activities involved in conduct of elections is an important task for all election offices. This is primarily achieved by establishing reliable and secure communication linkages between various stakeholders. The importance of strategic communication planning in elections cannot be undermined. It is at the heart of successful election planning and management.
Appointment of State Level Nodal Officer for Communication:
Every state has a position in the police forces called ADG / IG Communications who is responsible for procuring and managing the communication system in State police. This officer may preferably be appointed as the Nodal Officer for Communication in each state and should be responsible for assessing requirements and providing communication systems at each PS and also for coordinating with neighbouring states and the centre for procurement, etc. This officer should be appointed as Nodal at least 6-8 months prior to the due date of elections, so that he has enough time for issuing purchase orders wherever necessary.
Levels of Communication:
The following levels of communication are to be established and made operational, during elections:
National level - ECI, MHA, MOD, Mobile operators etc., 5.8.2. State Level - CEO, Chief Secretary, Police Headquarter, Nodal Officers (Police, Expenditure Monitoring, MCC etc.), election candidates, election observers.
District level-District Election Officers, Superintendents of Police, Returning Officers/ Asstt. Returning Officers, election observers, election candidates.
Subdivision and Tehsil level - Asst. Returning Officers, field level staff of revenue and police departments, election candidates.
Polling Station Level - Sector/Zonal Magistrates, security forces deployed, Polling personnel, BLOs, polling agents.
Communication network is used during the election period by police for the following purposes:
Pre poll period - this is the period when planning for polls takes place; and communication network is required for the following tasks:
Information about the physical status of polling stations - by sector officers and sector police officers.
Information regarding possible routes of transportation of polling parties to and from the polling stations.
Input on the criticality status of the polling station by the local police.
Sector officers’ assessment of vulnerability of polling stations in his sector.
Draft plan for deployment of security forces made polling station wise.
Tracking of movement of illicit liquor and cash,freebies and general law and order in the field.
Receipt of election related complaints, physical verification and redressal of the same.
Information regarding availability of security personnel, to be deployed for various election related work.
Information on the dispatch of polling parties to polling stations.
Poll Day - for conduct of elections, reliable communication network is required for:
Reporting any emergency situation in the polling station - EVM breakdown, security threat, polling personnel welfare etc. and respond without delay.
Monitoring the law-and-order situation, throughout the day and taking appropriate security measures, wherever found necessary.
Monitoring election expenditure and compliance of MCC on poll day for reporting at appropriate levels.
Monitoring of FS,SSTs and QRTs e). Communication with Sector officer, Sector police officers and zonal incharge.
Post poll period - in the follow up of polling process, a good communication network serves the following purposes:
Tracking the polling parties on their way back to the headquarters.
Reporting on the final status of men and material, after the completion poll.
Monitoring and reporting of the status of strong rooms till counting.
Counting Day: A secure and reliable communication system is required on the counting day for:
Tracking the progress of counting in the counting halls.
Monitoring law and order situation on the counting day and taking. appropriate measures.
Means of communication, deployed in elections:
Technological means:
● Landline phones
● Mobile phones
● VHF sets
● Satellite phones
● Internet
● Walkie-talkie sets
Non-Technological means:
● Sector/Zonal magistrates
● Runners
● Motorcyclists/cyclists
Communication Plan
Detailed communication plans need to be prepared separately for normal areas as well as for extremism/ LWE affected, inaccessible areas with challenging terrain. Following measures are required for developing a full proof communication plan.
Assessment of requirements for seamless communication during election
During elections, assessing requirements for seamless communication is crucial. Assessment should be done for: -
Telephonic communication- landlines, mobile communication
Locations & setting up of control rooms at strategic locations.
Shadow area assessment and logistics requirement to cover those areas.
Satellite phones
Logistics requirements for wireless sets
Availability of trained manpower-personnels like wireless operators & supervisors
Establishment of communication cell
There should be a communication cell at state as well as at the district HQ level. Both the cells should be in coordination and connection with each other.

State communication cell
A state level communication cell should be established and headed by the ADG/IG communication appointed as the Nodal Officer for Communication. It will be responsible for assessing requirements of logistics etc. and providing a communication network for each district down till the police station level and on the poll day for each polling station. It would also make arrangements for alternative means of communication for shadow zone areas.
District communication cell
A district communication cell should be established and headed by at at least a DySP rank officer and consisting of SIs (Technical and wireless) and sufficient staff to coordinate and control the communication related issues. This body will ensure smooth and seamless communication within the district, functioning of composite control rooms, co- ordination amongst various stakeholders & coordination with state communication cell.
Identification of different stakeholders and having prior meetings with them.
Officials of DOT b). Representatives of different mobile service providers c). Local administration- civil & police d). Representatives of CAPFs e). Representatives of wireless & communication department f). Representatives of postal department
Functioning and setting up of the control room.
At both the State and district levels, composite police control rooms (CPCRs) need to be established, under the supervision of representatives of CEO office and police HQs for the state level and under the supervision of a senior officer nominated by DEO and SP for district level.
Tasks of State Police CCR: -
● Tracking force movement between phases.
● Monitoring general law and order ahead of the election.
● Overseeing potentially critical events such as nomination processions, rallies, and visits by prominent figures.
● Establishing a communication system for reporting emergencies, conveying instructions from authorized officers, and providing Situation Reports (SITREPS) to various officers.
Tasks of the District Police composite control room
Composite control room should be set up consisting of all stakeholders - senior magistrates of district administration, representatives of DEO, representatives of CAPF and state police for monitoring election processes and exchange of information. It should be functional 24*7 and equipped with all necessary communication devices (telephone connectivity, mobile connectivity, wireless communication etc.) of all units of CAPFs, State Forces, Medical, Fire and other agencies connected with Election processes. It should have a communication plan for booths, sectors, zones and others as ordered by the DEO office. It should also be seamlessly connected with Dial 112.
Secondary control room should be set up in case of far-flung areas and it should be in regular contact with the Composite control room at District.
Sample Communication Plan (example) a). Synopsis of communication plan
Identification of shadow areas
Number and details of booths to be covered by telephonic communication
/ mobile phones etc.
Number and details of booths to be covered by wireless mode of communication.
Number of SAT-Phone required
JointControl Room to be formed with state police, district administration, CAPFs and other stake holders should be operationalized by (Date to be mentioned)
Mobile Number of: -
Village Pradhan/other service people / Chowkidar Doctors, P1, P2, Sector Magistrates, Zonal Magistrate
Additional arrangement for communicating with polling parties and forces on D-1, D, D+1 day i.e. different desks can be created with landline phones in control room.
Detailed communication plan (polling station wise)
Booth No./
Name Name and Contact details/mobile no. of
PO Security incharge BLO Two Local Persons

Shadow area communication planning a). Identification of network shadow areas, sector and zone wise.
Detailed mapping of availability of particular mobile network in weak signal area.
Joint survey and co-ordination with mobile operators/DOT officials for alternative communication arrangement in network shadow area.
Establishment of adequate wireless repeater station in adjoining PS & security forces camps for uninterrupted dedicated communication.
Allotment of dedicated wireless signal code to deployed state and CAPFs components for clarity of communication and to avoid confusion about identity of signal sender and responder.
Joint training and familiarization on communication equipment well in advance.
Ensuring sufficient availability of satellite phones and wireless sets
(HF, VHF etc.) h). Communication plan must include name and numbers of runners living in shadow areas.
Joint command and control center must have communication means to connect to remotest polling booth.
In maoist areas communication, being the lifeline, it should be accorded top priority.
ROLE OF POLICE IN ENFORCING MODEL CODE OF CONDUCT
Model Code of Conduct is a set of guidelines given by the Election Commission of India to develop and maintain an environment for maintaining a healthy and peaceful atmosphere conducive to the conduct of smooth elections and to provide a level playing field for all political parties and candidates.
Model Code of Conduct comes into operation right from the time and day, the election schedule is announced by the Election Commission and remains in operation till completion of election process as per the election notification. In the case of a bye-election, Model Code will no longer be in operation as soon as the result of the bye-election is declared by the Returning officer. The provisions of Model Code of Conduct apply to all organisations/committees, corporations/ commissions etc, funded wholly or partially by the Central Govt. or any State Govt. Model Code of Conduct will apply to all candidates, political parties and the government of the said State.
MCC
Provisions of Model Code of Conduct
Restrictive and prohibitory orders in force should be fully respected.
Cooperation should be extended to all election officials at all times.
All political workers must display badges or identity cards.
The local police should be fully informed of the venue and time of proposed meetings well in time and with all necessary permissions taken.
Permissions must be obtained for use of loudspeakers.
Restrictions on plying of vehicles during campaign and on poll day should be fully obeyed.
Except voters, candidates and their election/polling agents, only persons with a specific valid authority letter from ECI can enter any polling booth.
Any complaint or problem regarding the conduct of election shall be brought to the notice of the observer/DEO/RO/SO etc.
After the campaign period is over all political functionaries who are not voters of the constituency shall leave the constituency immediately.
Permission for all vehicles used for campaigning should be taken from the competent authority.
During filing of nominations only 3 vehicles are allowed to come within the periphery of 100 meters of RO office.

SOPs should be issued with respect to procedure to be followed on seizure of cash and other valuables.
District level MCMC committee to be activated.
The directions of the Election Commission regarding the regulation of road shows during elections should be followed.
The names of star campaigners should be communicated within 7 days of the notification of elections.
No minister shall enter any polling station or place of counting unless he is a candidate or as a voter only for voting.
No inducement financial or otherwise shall be offered to the electors.
Cast or communal feelings of the electors shall not be appealed to.
No activity which can aggravate existing differences or cause tension between different caste or communities or religions shall be attempted.
Any place of worship shall not be used for election propaganda including speeches or publicity material during electioneering.
Corrupt practices or electoral offences should not be practiced during the election by any political party or workers.
Seizure of illicit cash and other valuables.
No person in procession shall carry any article which is capable of being misused as missiles or weapons.
Posters of other parties or candidates shall not be removed or defaced.
No defacement of any form permitted on government premises except specifically earmarked places.
No defacement on private places against the existing law or without consent of the owner.
No use of loudspeakers for publicity without specific permission and before 6:00 AM and beyond 10:00 PM on any day.
No liquor should be distributed during elections.
No temporary offices to be set up in religious places or educational institutions or by encroachment or within 200 meters of polling stations.
No person having official security or private security guards for himself shall be appointed as an election agent or polling agent or counting agent.\
No convoys of more than 10 vehicles excluding security vehicles shall we allowed from the date of announcement of elections.
External modifications of vehicles in contravention of the Motor Vehicle act will not be allowed.
No electioneering should be done after the end of campaign period.
The following actions need to be taken by the police for enforcement of model code of conduct. 6.2.1 PRE-POLL ACTIONS -
No individual or group of persons can be allowed to display arms during a procession or any meeting in support of a candidate, under any circumstances.
All meetings/processions for campaigning activity should be video graphed for surveillance purpose and strict action as per law shall be taken in case of violations of this direction.
To ensure that elections are conducted in free, fair and peaceful manner the Police authorities shall ensure thorough monitoring of social media platforms and take appropriate action as per the relevant provisions of law.
Political functionaries/party workers/procession functionaries/ campaign functionaries etc., who have been brought from outside the constituency and who are not voters of the constituency, should not continue to remain present in the constituency during the silence period, as their continued presence, after the end of the campaign period, may undermine or vitiate the eco-system required for free and fair election.However, the said restrictions may not be insisted upon during General Election to Lok Sabha/State Legislative Assembly in respect of office bearers of political parties who is in-charge of State. Such Office bearers of political parties shall declare his place of stay in State Headquarter and his movement during the period in question shall remain confined normally between his party office and his place of stay.
RESTRICTIONS ON THE PRINTING OF PAMPHLETS, POSTERS ETC.
Printers and publishers are required to comply with the provisions of section 127A of R. P Act, 1951 and ECI’s directions. All the printing press shall be informed within 3 days of announcement of election programme in writing by the District Magistrate to furnish information and printed material as required U/s 127A of RP Act 1951.
In case of any violation of the provisions of Sec. 77(1) and 127A of RP Act, 1951, 171H of IPC and Commission’s directions, strict action should be taken.
REGULATION OF PLYING OF VEHICLES DURING CAMPAIGN
PERIOD
Strict action against vehicles plying in contravention of provisions of Motor Vehicle Act.
Close watch on vehicles for any possible mischief or criminal activities,carrying of illegal arms, illicit liquor, and anti-social elements - Such vehicles not to be released till elections and penal actions under relevant law shall be taken.
Vehicles for campaign purpose may ply only with prior approval of RO.
Original permits bearing number of vehicle and name of candidate shall be displayed on windscreen of vehicles. Details of vehicles used for campaigning or electioneering purpose by candidates shal be conveyed to election expenditure Observers by DEO to check whether the expenditure in this regard has been included in the Expenditure account of the candidates.
Vehicle not registered for campaigning if found being used for campaigning shall be deemed to be unauthorized campaigning for the candidate - Action for such activity be taken u/s 171H of IPC.
During filing of nominations upto 3 vehicles be allowed to come within the periphery of 100 meters of RO/ARO office - Expenditure will be included in the account of the candidate.
In case visits by party leader as covered U/S 77 (1) (a) the permits of vehicles for road journey be issued centrally by CEO in different color.
Convoys of more than 10 vehicles (excluding security vehicles in view of security gradation of PP) not to be allowed from the date of notification till completion of election - Bigger convoys be broken up keeping a minimum distance of 100 meters.
No poster/flag/campaign material be displayed on commercial vehicles, except in case of vehicles permitted for electioneering (Action u/s 171- H of IPC).
Displaying of flags and stickers on private vehicles - If it aims to solicit vote for a candidate, then provision of S. 171-H IPC would be attracted.
Only one flag/banner/poster/placard be allowed on a vehicle during the procession.
DEFACEMENT OF PUBLIC & PRIVATE PLACES
No wall writing, pasting of posters/papers or defacement in any other form or erecting/displaying of cutouts,hoardings,banners, flags etc shall be permitted on any government property.
Educational institutions (including grounds) not to be used for campaigning/rallies.
No political advertisement shall be displayed/pasted at the buildings/civil structure or any other structure owned by PSUs or in their premises during the MCC period.
In case of violation of legal provisions relating to prevention of defacement of property penal action to be taken.
PUBLIC MEETING/PROCESSIONS
A register for permissions granted for meetings etc.,. shall be maintained.
“First come first” principle shall be followed strictly for granting of permissions.
Permissions shall be subject to local laws / prohibitory orders.
No public meeting / processing shall be allowed after the campaign period is over.
Expenditure plan of the public rally must be enclosed with the application for permission.
Copy of this expenditure plan shall be given by the DEO along with the copy of permission to the officer deputed for maintenance of Law & Order, Asstt. Expenditure Observer, VST & Accounting Team.
Permission for public rally shall not be given if the candidate does not produce prescribed documents.
BRIEFING OF CHIEF MINISTER / HOME MINISTER BY POLICE
OFFICERS
Security briefings of Chief Minister or the Home Ministers when considered essential, should be undertaken by the Home Secretary or the Chief Secretary, who in turn should be briefed by the police agencies.
In case where police agency’s/official’s presence is considered essential, the Chief Secretary/Home Secretary may require the police agency/ official to be present in such briefings.
POLL DAY ACTIONS -
REGULATION OF PLYING OF VEHICLES ON POLL DAY
One vehicle for candidate, one vehicle for election agent and one vehicle for candidate’s workers / party workers to be allowed on poll day.
The vehicle shall carry not more than 5 persons including driver. If candidate is absent from constituency no other person shall be allowed to use the vehicle allotted to him.
No other vehicle should be allowed to be used by any leader other than vehicle allotted.
Permits be issued by DEO to be displayed on windscreen of vehicles.
Carrying of voters by these vehicles is an electoral offense u/s 133 and shall attract penal action u/s 123(5) of RP Act, 1951.
Exceptions on poll day - Govt. Servant on duty, transportation of patient / old / infirm persons, voters in their own vehicle, public transport and other genuine bona-fide use other than election.
Private vehicles used by owners for themselves / family members for going to polling booth to vote, not to be allowed within a radius of 200 meter of PS.
NO CANVASSING WITHIN PS OR ANY PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PLACE
WITHIN A DISTANCE OF 100 METERS OF A Polling Station a). Carrying of cellular phones, cordless phone etc, not to be allowed except officers on duty in the 100 meters of a PS.
Voter slips to be plain white slips without name of candidate / party markings/ symbol.
No posters or banners are allowed within 100mts of Polling Station.
Booth Level Officer to be stationed outside the polling booth.
PROHIBITION OF LOUDSPEAKERS, MEGA PHONE ETC AND
DISOR- DERLY CONDUCT - WITHIN 100 MTRS OF A Polling
Station a). Amplifying or reproducing the human voice by any apparatus shall not be allowed in the area.In case of contravention such apparatus shall be seized.
Shouting or otherwise act in a disorderly manner shall not be allowed.
POLLING NEIGHBOURHOOD
In order to prevent electioneering at the Polling Stations on the date of poll and to maintain law and order in the counting centers at the time of counting of votes, the Commission hereby directs that no person other than authorized election and police officials shall be allowed to either carry or use cellular phones, cordless phones, wireless sets, etc., in the 100 meter perimeter of the Polling Stations described as the “Polling Station Neighborhood” and within the polling booth.
Presiding Officers will be allowed to carry their phones in silent mode and use only for communication with Sector Officers, Returning Officers and Observers in case of necessity and exigency.
POSSESSION OF ARMS NEAR THE POLLING STATION:
The provisions of Section 134 B of the Representation of People Act, 1951 provides that, except those expressly permitted by that section, no one else carries any arms or indulges in show of arms in Polling Stations or Polling Station Neighborhood, so that the conduct of elections can take place in a free and fair manner without any intimidation of voters, or threat perception to them.
No person, even if a recipient of any form of security from any quarter, should enter into any Polling Station or Polling Station Neighborhood, accompanied by such security personnel.
The security agencies in charge of extending security must therefore, recast security plans accordingly. It would be the duty of those in charge of the election to ensure that the provisions of the above quoted Section 134B of the Representation of the People Act 1951 are strictly enforced and no security personnel attached to any person (i.e., any candidate, any of his agents, workers, supporters, or even any elector) enter into any Polling Station or Polling Station Neighborhood. Only one security personnel of SPG protectee or Z+ protectee can enter a Polling Station in plain clothes and arms kept in a concealed manner.
A Single window system for Public meetings/Rallies/Processions, use of loudspeakers and use of vehicles for election campaigning as well as use of non-commercial/remote/uncontrolled airports/ helipads shall be constituted with one Officer of rank of SP/ASP in the office of CEO, DSP in the officer of DEO and ASI in the office of RO as a member of the single window system for speedy disposal of applications.
ROLE OF POLICE IN EXPENDITURE
MONITORING DURING ELECTIONS
It has been the endeavour of the ECI that the level playing field for all stakeholders, including candidates and political parties is not disturbed and the electoral process is not allowed to be vitiated by any means including misuse of money power. While curbing the menace of money and muscle power, ECI ensures that the general public does not face any inconvenience. The manual on Expenditure Monitoring includes, inter alia, role of police in expenditure monitoring. However, the chapter provides for a gist of important instruction to be taken into consideration by the police force:
OBJECTIVE OF ELECTION EXPENDITURE MONITORING
Election expenditure can broadly be divided into two categories.
The first category of election expenditure is the legal expenditure, which is allowed under the law for electioneering, subject to it being within the permissible limit. This would include expenditure connected with campaigning, which is spent on public meetings, public rallies posters, banners, vehicles, advertisements in print or electronic media etc.
The second category of the election expenditure is on items which are not permitted under the law, e.g., distribution of money, liquor, or any other item disbursed and given to the electors with the intent to influence them. This expenditure comes under the definition of “bribery” which is an offence both under IPC and under R.P. Act, 1951. The expenditure on such items is illegal.
Yet another form of expenditure which has come to the fore in recent times is on Surrogate Advertisements, Paid News and Social Media etc. The purpose of election expenditure monitoring is, therefore, threefold.
For the first category of expenditure, it must be ensured that all election expenditure on permitted items is truthfully reported and considered while scrutinising the expenditure account submitted by the candidates. As far as the second and third category of expenditure including surrogate advertisements, paid news etc., is concerned, it is obvious that it will never be reported by the political parties/ candidates. Expenditure on campaigning through social media tends to be underreported, if at all, especially by candidates. The systems should be robust enough to catch such expenditure as well, and not only include it in the account of election expenditure, but also take action against the wrongdoers under the relevant provisions of the law, including lodging of complaints before the police/ competent magistrate, if required.
Legal Provisions
Indian Penal Code 1860- Sections of IPC which includes Section 171B (Bribery), Section 171 E (Punishment for bribery), Section 171F (Punishment for undue influence or personation at an election), Section 171H (Illegal payments, in connection with an election), Section 171I (Failure to keep election accounts), are the relevant sections which needs attention for participating Police officials in the electoral process. These Sections in detail is also part of Compendium of Instruction on Election Expenditure Monitoring, available on the website of Election Commission.
The Representation of the People Act, 1951- Important Sections of RP Act, 1951, are given below: Section 77 (Account of election expenses and maximum thereof), Section 78 (Lodging of account with the District Election Officer), Section 10A (Disqualification for failure to lodge account of election expenses), Section 123 (Corrupt practices), Section 127A (Restrictions on the printing of pamphlets, posters etc.). It is expected that the above given sections of RP Act, 1951 be given a thoughtful reading as part of preparation for monitoring of election expenditure.
The Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961- Rule 90 (Maximum election expenses incurred by contesting candidate) - The total of the expenditure of which account is to be kept under Section 77 of the R. P. Act, 1951 and which is incurred or authorized in connection with an election in a State or Union Territory mentioned on column 1 of the Table below shall not exceeda). in any one parliamentary constituency of that State or Union Territory, the amount specified in the corresponding column
2 of the said Table mentioned in the rule 90 ; and b). in any one assembly constituency, if any, of that State or Union Territory, the amount specified in the corresponding column 3 of the said Table mentioned in rule 90.
As per notification of M/o Law and Justice, Legislative Department’s Notification S. O. 72(E) dated 6th January, 2022, amending Rule 90 of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961, for anyone Parliamentary Constituency, there are two limits for two sets of States/UTs- Rs. 95 Lakhs and Rs. 75 Lakhs.
For anyone Assembly Constituency, there are two limits for two sets of States/UTs-Rs.40 Lakhs and Rs. 28 Lakhs. It is suggested to peruse Rule 90 of Conduct of Election Rules, 1961 and the cited notification of M/o Law & Justice.
Structure of Election Expenditure Monitoring and Functions of its various organs- The Police Department team needs to be aware about the structure of the monitoring process and functions of various constituents of the process. The same is given below:
Expenditure Observer (EO): Expenditure Observers are appointed by the Commission for specified constituencies to observe the election expenses incurred by the candidates. There shall be at least one Expenditure Observer for each district.
Assistant Expenditure Observer (AEO):
Assistant Expenditure Observers shall be appointed for each constituency on the date of notification of election by the DEO. There shall be at least one Assistant Expenditure Observer for each Assembly Constituency/Segment. He/She shall ensure that all the expenditure related reports/orders in respect of each candidate are obtained from all the teams engaged in Expenditure Monitoring and are properly reflected in the candidate’s day to day accounts of Election Expenditure. In case of complaint of corrupt practice, He/She shall pass on the same to the Flying Squads for immediate action and inform the Expenditure Observer immediately. The Flying Squads shall report to him/her about action taken on each complaint. If no action is taken by the Flying Squad or there is delay in taking action, he should bring it to the notice of Expenditure Observer, who in turn shall report to the Commission with a copy to the DEO and the CEO. If He/She thinks that the SST is not working properly or is not correctly deployed, He/She may suggest changes to ensure that major arterial roads are covered by SSTs.
Video Surveillance Teams (VST): One or more Video Surveillance Team shall be deployed for each Assembly Constituency/Segment consisting of at least one official and one videographer. The Assistant Expenditure Observer shall personally supervise videography of sensitive events and big public rallies in the constituency. If more than one public rally is organized on the same day, more than one video teams shall be deployed to record the procession and the rally. Video Surveillance Teams (VSTs) will function from the date of announcement of election and shall continue with their duty upto date of poll/re-poll, if any.
Video Viewing Team (VVT): There shall be a Video Viewing Team for each Assembly Constituency/Segment with one officer and two clerks. The Video Viewing Team shall make CDs in house out of the video recordings, captured by Video Surveillance Teams to identify expenditure related issues and MCC related issues.
Accounting Team (AT): There shall be at least one Accounting Team for each Assembly Constituency/Segment consisting of one official and one Assistant/Clerk. The Accounting Team shall ensure that the expenditure on all the election campaign material which is used after the filing of nomination is included in the Shadow Observation Register, though the payment for it may have been made before filing of nominations. Similarly, the expenditure on rally or procession in connection with filing of nomination should be shown as part of the election expenditure. Accounting Team will function from the date of announcement upto date of poll/re-poll, if any.
Complaint Monitoring Control Room and Call Centre: A 24X7 Call Centre shall be established in the Control Room at the district level to operate from the date of announcement of election. The expenditure related complaints are to be passed on immediately to the officer concerned of the Flying Squad with intimation to the Expenditure Observer, and in case of MCC related complaints, a copy is to be passed on to the General Observer.
Media Certification and Monitoring Committee (MCMC):
There shall be a Media Certification and Monitoring Committee (MCMC) in each district. If the MCMC finds any advertisement or advertorial published in print media, it shall bring it to the notice of Expenditure Observer.
Flying Squads (FS) and Static Surveillance Teams (SSTs): There shall be three or more dedicated Flying Squads in each Assembly Constituency/Segment for tracking of illegal cash transactions or any distribution of liquor or any other items suspected of being used for bribing the voters. The Flying Squads shall consist of one Senior Executive Magistrate as the head of the team, one senior police officer, one videographer and 3 to 4 armed police personnel. They are to be provided with a dedicated vehicle, mobile phone, a video camera and necessary Panchnama documents required for seizure of cash or goods.
There shall be three or more Static Surveillance Teams in each Assembly Constituency with one Magistrate and three or four police personnel in each team. This team shall put up check posts and keep a watch on the movement of large quantities of cash, illegal liquor, any suspicious item or arms being carried in their area. The entire process of checking shall be video graphed. The locations of Static Surveillance Teams shall be changed periodically to maintain an element of surprise.
Flying Squads will be operational from the date of announcement of the elections and Static Surveillance Teams will function from the date of notification up to date of poll/re-poll, if any.
However, Flying Squads and Static Surveillance Teams shall be kept deployed in poll gone States/UTs and States/UTs where polls are scheduled in phases, as under: -
Case-I: In case of States/UTs where polling is over, FSs and SSTs shall be kept active at strategic locations and in districts sharing borders with neighboring States/UTs.
Case-II: In case of States where polling is scheduled in phases, Flying Squads shall be kept active as under: - a). One Flying Squad may be continued in each assembly segment of Parliamentary Constituency, where polling is over, till the end of election process in the entire state; and b). Flying Squads/SSTs may be kept operational in full strength, as per SOP dated 29th May, 2015 in the entire district where polls are going to be held in multiple phases, till the end of poll in the entire district.
Instructions on standard operating procedure for seizure and release of cash and other items dtd 29th May,2015 and 7th August,2023 shall be scrupulously followed by enforcement agencies.
District Grievance Committee (DGC): A committee comprising of three officers of the District, namely,(i) CEO-Zilla Parishad/CDO/ PD,DRDA, (ii) Nodal officer of Expenditure Monitoring in the District Election Office (Convener) and (iii) District Treasury Officer shall be formed to address the grievances if any with regard to seizures and release.The Committee shall suo-moto examine each case of seizure made by the Police or SST or FS and where the Committee finds that no FIR/complaint has been filed against the seizure or where the seizure is not linked with any candidate or political party or any election campaign etc., as per SOP dated 29th May,2015, it shall take immediate steps to order release of such cash etc. to such persons from whom the cah was seized after speaking order to that effect.If the release of cash is more than Rs.10 lakh then the nodal officer if Income Tax shall be kept informed before the release is effective.
The Committee shall meet once in 24hrs at pre-declared place and time and the DGC shall not delay in taking decision and keep any case pending unnecessarily up to the 7th day of the date of poll.
Expenditure Monitoring Cell: The DEO shall appoint one senior officer, not below the rank of SDM/ADM, conversant with accounting as the Nodal Officer of the Expenditure Monitoring Cell. All teams mentioned above and the Nodal Officer shall constitute the Expenditure Monitoring Cell.
Nodal Officers for Election Expenditure Monitoring for co-ordination among various Enforcement Agencies and Day to Day Reporting of Seizure
Nodal Officer in the CEO Office: The CEO shall appoint one senior officer in his office, not below the rank of Jt. CEO, for coordination on expenditure monitoring with Commission, training of election expenditure monitoring related personnel and political party functionaries, coordination with all the DEOs, other Nodal Officers in the state, Expenditure Observers, all enforcement agencies involved in election expenditure monitoring and with the Commission.
Nodal Officer of Police: One officer of the level of Inspector General at the Police Head Quarters of the state, shall be notified as the Nodal Officer for coordination with all FSs, SSTs, law enforcement agencies and with the Commission. His office telephone/fax number and mobile number shall be intimated to the Expenditure Observers, Investigation Directorate, Excise Department and other law enforcement agencies during election. He shall ensure training of all personnel engaged in FSs or SSTs. He shall be responsible for coordination with other law enforcement agencies, engaged in the election expenditure monitoring. He shall compile the seizure reports by the FSs and SSTs sent by the SPs of districts and send the composite Daily Activity Report in the prescribed format to the Expenditure Monitoring Cell of Commission every day, with a copy to the CEO. On the day of poll, he is required to furnish a compiled report on seizure made by FSs, SSTs and Police Authority for the entire election period from date of announcement to date of poll in a prescribed format to the CEO before 1 PM on poll day with a copy to the Commission.
Composite daily activity report should be furnished in Annexure-B8, B9 and B10 and final report should be furnished in Annexure-C4 by 1 PM on the day of poll.( May refer to the manual on Expenditure Monitoring)
On request of the Commission other Enforcement Agencies viz. CBIC, ED, DRI, CGST, FIU-IND, RBI, SLBC, Department of Post, RPF, Indian Coast Guard, Paramilitary Forces viz. CISF, BSF, SSB, ITBP, Assam Rifles, State Departments viz. State Commercial Tax, State GST, State Forest Department etc. also appoint Nodal Officers for Election Expenditure Monitoring during elections for coordination, sharing intelligence and reporting interception/seizure of cash, liquor, drugs/ narcotics, precious metals, freebies etc.
Recently, the Commission has issued instruction and Standard Operating Procedure for identification of Expenditure Sensitive Constituency (ESCs) and Expenditure Sensitive Pockets (ESPs). The State Police Department has a major role in such identification. Main features are given below:
The Chief Electoral Officer of the State/UT is required to identify a Constituency as Expenditure Sensitive Constituency (ESC) which is prone to high expenditure and corrupt practices, on the basis of history, profile of the constituency and past developments after having discussion with District Election Officers, State Police Department, and enforcement agencies which participate in expenditure monitoring process.
The Chief Electoral Officer of the State/UT will organise the meeting with the State Level Nodal Officers of various enforcement agencies at least 6 months before the month of expiry of the Legislative Assembly of the State/UT and/or Lok Sabha, to identify mapping of sensitivities on two main grounds.
Functionalities like main cohorts of cash, liquor, drugs, precious metals and freebies.
Area wise sensitivities (District wise, group of district wise, AC wise)
There is a checklist given below which are indicative empirical parameters This list is only indicative and may be supplemented with specific other expenditure sensitivities as deliberated by the CEO Office in consultation with Nodal Officers of enforcement agencies as mentioned in point 1. The indicative list of empirical parameters of identifying ESC is given below:
High amount of cash, liquor, drugs/narcotics, precious metals/ jewellery, freebies etc. during the last two Assembly/ Lok Sabha elections.
High amount of seizure of cash, liquor, drugs/narcotics, precious metals/jewellery, freebies, etc. in the preceding six months of announcement of election.
Constituencies sharing State border and / or International border with neighboring State/UT and / or Country be identified as ESC based on history of seizure or other incidents during past elections.
Constituency having a significant number of Expenditure Sensitive Pockets (ESPs).
Information about treasury chests which show a 20% or more increase in demand for currency in the six months leading up to announcement of elections can be obtained from RBI for identification of ESCs.
Unusually high number of online/digital transitions from a few to many accounts, mostly of small denominations, starting witnessed by banks 6 months before probable date of poll.
After the broad sensitivities are compiled by CEO Office in consultation with State Nodal Officers of enforcement agencies, the district wise findings will be communicated to DEOs which in turn will discuss and seek further inputs by forming a District Intelligence Committee composed of district level officers of enforcement agencies. In case of few Central Agencies where the strength in State is very few, the District Intelligence Committee may seek inputs directly from State Level Nodal Officers in place of district level officers of respective enforcement agencies.
The District Intelligence Committee as mentioned above will give its inputs back to the CEO office within stipulated time which is = (Poll month of corresponding previous elections minus 5 months). The CEO Office will compile detailed lists with observations and comments and will inform the Commission within the timeline of Poll month of corresponding previous election minus 4 months (Poll month minus 4 months). This list shall be marked as confidential and will contain ESCs, Assembly Constituency wise, including nature of sensitivity and preparedness (what to do?) and strategies to overcome the challenge (how to do?).
Sticking to timelines is important as the list and observations received from CEOs four months in advance from the month of expiry of the Legislative Assembly of the State/UT and/or Lok Sabha is required to be perused for making adequate arrangements for quality monitoring.
For an ESC, there may be upto two Assistant Expenditure Observers, such additional number of Flying Squads, Static Surveillance Teams and Video Surveillance Teams as required, over and above, those deployed in the remaining constituencies.
The list of ESCs is to be furnished in the format prescribed as under:
Sl.
No. Name of
Expenditure
Sensitive
Constituency (ESC) Name of District ESC as per empirical criteria Criteria mentioned by which agency/ agencies Detailed note on nature of sensitivity of ESC

Standard Operating Procedure for identification of Expenditure Sensitive Pockets (ESPs):
The District Election Officer (DEO), Superintendent of Police (SP) in consultation with the Expenditure Observer (EO), deployed in the constituency shall identify the Expenditure Sensitive Pockets (ESPs) in the constituency during the first visit of the EO.
Pockets having following characteristics may be identified as ESPs:
Inputs of District Intelligence Committee be considered for identification of ESPs.
Pockets having a large number of complaints/incidents of distribution of cash, liquor, freebies etc. in the last elections.
Other empirical criteria as mentioned in the list of marking of ESCs should also be perused.
ESPs are to be kept under 24 x 7 surveillance by Flying Squads (FSs) and Static Surveillance Teams (SSTs) particularly during last three days of poll. There shall be a mix of Central Paramilitary Force in the SSTs during this period.
A reading of Compendium of Instructions on Election Expenditure Monitoring is available on website of Commission imbibing details of monitoring wherein the Police Department has a major role to play. Link is as follows: https://eci.gov.in/files/ file/14497-compendium-of-instructions-on- electionexpenditure-monitoring-August-2023/ In the above given compendium which gets revised annually, important instructions related to FS, SST and meant for perusal of Police is given in Chapter of SOPs.
Following points are also important to keep in mind for preparing effectively on taking effective action on flow of inducements:
Ensure adequate strength of FS and SSTs to be factored while requisitioning the police manpower.
Mapping of border check posts with check posts of bordering states. Border sensitivity. Border check-posts should be CCTV guarded for effective monitoring.
Ensure timely border coordination meetings at district, sub-division and police station level with the counterparts in bordering states.
Route maps of flow of liquor and drugs and inducements.
Cross functional training with agencies like Income Tax, GST and other agencies.
Trail of flow and routes of inducements to be included in FIRs pertaining to inducements.
Quick flow of information of interceptions to Income Tax Department and relevant agencies. Communicating with the Income Tax department when cash of 10 lakhs or more is intercepted by Flying Squads/ Static Surveillance teams without criminality attached to it, during enforcement of MCC.
Mapping of expenditure vulnerability done at all levels starting from polling station wise, expenditure sensitive pocket wise, assembly constituency wise, district wise needs to be closely monitored. List of persons who may influence voters through various modes of inducement be made well in advance to keep them in tight vigil.
Special focus be kept in monitoring crucial places, keep them under surveillance like Railway Stations, Trucks, Buses, Ambulance, etc.
From the analysis of districts where significant seizure of cash was made in previous two elections, there should be special vigil of districts which exhibit high seizures.
Surprise element of SSTs to be ensured while overseeing functioning of Static Surveillance Teams.
Progress of electoral offenses in previous elections to be monitored promptly.
List of absconding and warranted persons with reference to liquor cases to be prepared and details to be shared with bordering states.
Along with the State Excise Department, ensure that main and traditional routes of inflow of liquor, drugs should be marked and properly guarded. Entry Nakas also should be strongly guarded.
Directs focus on arrest of kingpins, stockists and distributors of liquor and drugs for effective deterrence.
Pre-embarkation checks at Commercial Airports/helipads/Non- commercial Airports: during the election process, all rules and procedures with regard to frisking and checking of persons and baggage should be strictly enforced as per the directions of ECI.
ELECTION SEIZURE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (ESMS):
To curb the menace of money power in elections, the Commission requisitions services of various Enforcement Agencies viz. Central Board of Direct Taxes, Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs, State Police Department, State Excise Department, Enforcement Department, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, Financial Intelligence Unit-India, Narcotics Control Bureau, Department of Posts, Railway Protection Force, paramilitary forces like Border Security Force, Central Industrial Security Force, Indo Tibetan Border Police, Sashastra Seema Bal, Assam Rifles, Indian Coast Guard etc.
As per existing practice, the Chief Electoral Officer manually compiles the seizure reports received from these Enforcement Agencies and send day to day compiled seizure report to the Commission by e-mail/post.
The procedure of compilation of seizure reports manually by the Chief Electoral Office is cumbersome, and not on real time base as it is a complex process where lot of time in reporting and compiling is involved. Therefore, a software with real time reporting called as ‘Election Seizure Management System’ has been developed by ECI and used for the first time in the GELA of Mizoram, Chhattisgarh,Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Telangana-2023.
The software will ensure reflection of real time seizure efforts from the field, remove redundancy and duplicacy,coordination among enforcement agencies and record keeping etc.
Field level functionaries from the Police Department are given login ids to fill data as per the action taken from the time of announcement of elections till completion of poll so as to digitise the seizure related activities and for proper monitoring.
AVOIDANCE OF HIGH-HANDEDNESS BY POLICE AUTHORITIES:
Police authorities shall show maximum restraint while conducting checks and seizures. They shall avoid harassment of the public under the pretext of mandatory poll related checks.
Frisking, checking and seizure activity shall be affected strictly as per the procedure laid down under relevant laws and directions of the Commission.
Any grievance arising out of such activity shall be referred to the District Grievance Committee for redressal immediately.
The enforcement agency personnel shall carry their IDs and be in uniform ( if apliabel ) while carrying out election related searches and seizures.
Searches and Seizure activities shall be videographed to avoid any allegations.

ROLE OF POLICE IN POLL ARRANGEMENT
PRE-POLL, POLL AND POST POLL
Polling is the most important event in the election process. Therefore, it shall be ensured that pre poll, poll and post poll activities are conducted strictly in accordance with law and the prescribed procedure.
PRE POLL: The following actions may be undertaken during the pre poll day:
Ensure that the security force has reached polling stations according to the force deployment plan.
Carry out effective and focused flag marches for area domination, point patrolling and other confidence building measures.
Formation of SSTs/FSTs/ QRTs etc. for surveillance purposes and carry out effective enforcement activities and take preventive action.
Ban on carrying of licensed arms shall continue to operate till declaration of results and no licence for arms shall be issued till elections are over.
Strict vigil shall be maintained by police, thorough checking of lorries, light vehicles and all other vehicles, preferably by setting up equipped check posts, from the day of announcement of elections to ensure that no undesirable elements or arms and ammunition are being transported into the constituency from outside and to apprehend them and take appropriate action under law if they are doing so.
DURING POLL:
LAW AND ORDER MEASURES:
The DEO/SP shall brief the CAPF/ State Police about provisions of Section 131 of the R.P. Act, 1951. For this, there shall be proper coordination between the Presiding Officer and CAPF/State Police posted in a polling station.
No Election Booth of Candidates shall be set up within a radius of
200 metres from the Polling Station. Even where more than one Polling Station has been set up in the same Polling Station Location or premises, there shall be only one Election Booth of a candidate for such a group of Polling Stations beyond a distance of 200 metres from such premises.
No electioneering shall be allowed within the 200-metre area around the Polling Stations on the date of poll.
No person other than Observers appointed by the Commission and authorised election/ police officials shall be allowed to either carry or use mobile phones, wireless sets, etc., in the 100-metre perimeter of the Polling Stations described as the “Polling Station Neighbourhood” (Section 130 Representation of thePeopleAct1951) and within the Polling Station.
Possession of Arms near the Polling Station: The provisions of Section 134 B of the Representation of People Act, 1951 provides that, except those expressly permitted by that section, no one else carries any arms or indulges in show of arms in Polling Stations or Polling Station Neighborhood. No person, even if a recipient of any form of security from any quarter, shall enter into any Polling Station or Polling Station Neighborhood, accompanied by such security personnel.
Security Arrangements: Commissioner of Police/ Superintendent of Police shall deploy police forces, including CAPF, as per approved District Deployment Plan on static and mobile duties. All police forces, including CAPF, deployed for polling station security shall take positions in and control of the respective Polling Stations on the day prior to the poll day.
In case CAPF has not reached the assigned Polling Station, due to any reason, the poll shall not commence in that Polling Station.
At the polling station where CAPF personnel are deployed according to District Deployment Plan, one personnel of the CAPF deployed for the Polling Station shall be placed at the door of the Polling Station, either in static or oscillating mode, in order to observe the proceedings inside the Polling Station (Janak Singh V/s Ram Das Rai & Other in CA 9228 of 2003: SC). Moreover, the Company Commanders of CAPF shall also move for area domination and confidence building measure in the sectors assigned to them.
The State Police shall remain solely responsible for maintenance of the general law and order inside and outside of the Polling Station premises (as different from polling stations).
State Police Force shall not replace the CAPFs at the Polling Stations, in contravention of the District Deployment Plan, under any circumstances. No officer of the local state police, with or without a contingent, shall position himself at the Polling Station and exercise any supervision and control over the CAPF at the Polling Station.
MCC-GENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON POLL DAY:
One vehicle each for candidate, election agent and for candidate’s workers/ party workers be allowed and not more than 5 persons including driver are allowed in a vehicle. Carrying of voters by these vehicles is a Corrupt practice. It is also an electoral offence u/s 133 of the RP, Act, 1951.
Permits issued by DEO shall be displayed on the windscreen of vehicles.
Providing free conveyance to voters to and from the polling stations by a candidate/his agent is a corrupt practice and strictly forbidden. The offence may be booked under relevant provisions.
The aforementioned restrictions shall apply to all vehicles propelled by mechanical power or otherwise, including but not restricted to taxies, private cars, trucks, tractors with or without trailers, auto-rickshaws, e-rickshaws, scooters, motor bikes, mini buses, station wagons etc., also, and shall be made applicable for a period of 24 hours before the time fixed for closure of poll and till the completion of poll.
Penal action, both under the provisions of the R.P.Act, 1951 and the Indian Penal Code shall be taken against anyone offending the above directions, in addition to action under the Motor Vehicles Act. All vehicles being used in violation of these directions shall be confiscated.
Private vehicles may be used by the owners for their private use, not connected with elections; (vii). Private vehicles being used by owners either for themselves or for members of their own family for going to the polling booth to exercise their franchise, but not going anywhere within a radius of 200 metres of a polling station; (viii). Vehicles used for essential services namely hospital vans, ambulance, milk vans, water tankers, electricity emergency duty vans, police on duty, officers on election duty shall be allowed to ply.
Public transport carriages like buses shall ply between fixed terminals and on fixed routes.
Taxis, three-wheeler scooters, rickshaws etc. For going to airports, railway stations, interstate bus stands, hospitals for journeys which cannot be avoided; (xi). Private vehicles may be used by sick or disabled persons for their own use; (xii). Vehicles being used by the Govt. officers on duty to reach their duty point shall be allowed to ply.
Cellular phones, cord less phone etc., not to be allowed except officers on duty in the 100 meters of a PS.
Voter slips to be plain white slips without name of candidate/ party markings/ symbol.
No campaign related posters or banners within100 meters of the Polling Booth.
During polling, PRO and other staff shall keep their mobile silent in the PS. If required they can talk from outside the polling booth.
Booth Level Officer to be stationed outside the polling booth at the Voter Assistance Booth (VAB). He shall keep with mobile phone switched on, along with the Alphabetical roll locator for the PS, near the polling stations.
Prohibition of loudspeakers, mega phones etc. and disorderly conduct – within 100 meters of a PS. Amplifying or reproducing the human voice by any apparatus not allowed within 100mts of PS. Shouting or otherwise, acting in a disorderly manner is not allowed.
None except authorised security personnel can enter within 100 metres of any polling station. Security personnel attached to any person not to be allowed inside the polling booth. Exception to the above only in case of person covered under Z+ security which is one security person in simple clothes and with one concealed arms.
POST POLL: Counting of votes is one of the most important stages of the election process. Therefore great vigilance shall be exercised not only on the actual counting of votes but also in maintenance of Law and Order.
Generally, orders under section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973(CrPC) are issued regarding ban on unlawful assemblies and prohibition on holding of public meetings during the day of counting, applicable for the areas/constituencies bound for polls.
This order is issued by the District Magistrate or any other competent authority effective from P-2day to P+1 day within the Constituency. The restrictions under 144 CrPC Order do not permit more than 5 persons to assemble/move together in the area.
In view of the statutory provision contained in Section 135C of the R.P. Act, 1951, ‘Dry Day’ shall be declared and notified under relevant state laws as is appropriate during the day of counting as indicated in the Commission’s notification.
Guarding of Strong rooms: There shall be a two tier guarding system for strong rooms: First tier, which is the innermost perimeter, shall be guarded by CAPF. This shall be a 24x7 CAPF armed guard. Minimum one section of CAPF armed guard shall be on duty 24X7 in Strong Rooms in Non LWE areas. For this purpose, minimum one platoon of CAPF shall be provided to guard the Strong Room round the clock. In LWE/Militancy/Insurgency area, the strong room shall be manned by 1 platoon each in 3 shifts. Second tier shall be from the State SAP. Protocol to be followed to enter the inner perimeter: No one shall be allowed to enter the inner perimeter without following the protocol.
Security Arrangements in and Around Counting Centers: Three-tier cordoning system shall be set up in all counting premises to prevent the entry of unauthorised persons inside the counting premises.
Victory Procession post the declaration of results can be restricted/ regulated. Strong arrangements have to be made to ensure that people of varying factions don’t clash.
Considering the multiple actions required to be taken on different functional dimensions, it is imperative that the Law & Order functionaries at the State, district and constituency level are fully aware of the important activities and steps required to be undertaken during the critical Pre-poll, Poll and Post poll period and are thoroughly prepared to execute them as per the guidelines of the Election Commission of India.
ROLE OF CAPF IN ELECTIONS
Conduct of free, fair and peaceful elections are a fundamental characteristic and requirement of a functional democracy, which involve various strenuous activities that are carried out by election machinery consisting of officials and staff from various departments, including security forces. The Commission invariably drafts and deputes Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF), in terms of Article 324 of the Constitution of India and in terms of Honorable Supreme Court orders in Election Commission of India Vs Union of India and Ors Writ Petition number 606/1993, wherever elections are conducted, on the basis of various inputs such as assessment of law and order situation on the ground received from multiple sources or any other relevant inputs.
Under Section 28 A of the Representation of the People Act 1951, all the officers and personnel from State Police and Central Armed Police Forces, so deployed for election related duties, shall stand deputed to the Election Commission of India for the period commencing from the date of the notification calling for such election and up to the date of completion of election process and accordingly, such officers and personnel, during that period, shall be under superintendence, direction and control of the Election Commission of India.
MEANING OF CAPFs:
Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) include all Central Armed Police Forces, State Armed Police Forces, Indian Reserve Battalion, Railway Protection Force and any other force deployed by the Ministry of Home Affairs, on direction of the Election Commission of India, for the purpose of elections.
STATE LEVEL FORCE COORDINATOR and STATE CAPF COORDINATOR:
The Ministry of Home Affairs shall appoint a State Level Force Coordinator (SLFC) for every poll-bound State/UT, six months in advance, not below the rank of Inspector General. However, for smaller States or UTs, an officer of the rank of Deputy Inspector General can be appointed.
The poll-bound State/UT shall appoint State CAPF Coordinator to assist State Police Nodal Officer, not below the rank of Inspector General of Police, for close coordination with State Level Force Coordinator appointed by the Ministry of Home Affairs Government of India. However, for smaller States or UTs, an officer of the rank of Deputy Inspector General can be appointed.
DEPLOYMENT OF CAPFs:
The Commission, invariably, directs deployment of CAPFs for free, fair and peaceful conduct of General Election/Bye-Elections to the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies.
CAPFs, so deployed, shall not be kept on reserve or used for any other purposes, other than specified by the Commission, except with the prior approval of the Commission through the CEO.
The District Deployment Plan shall be prepared by DEO and SP jointly for the district and shall be vetted by senior most General and Police Observers jointly.
The deployment of forces in the district, as per the approved District Deployment Plan, shall be the responsibility of the concerned Commissioner of Police/ Superintendent of Police.
CAPF shall invariably be deployed at all critical Polling Stations and the deployment plan shall be prepared in such a way that all Polling Stations are covered with effective static duty force reinforced by necessary mobile patrolling at the level of Sectors. In case of shortage of CAPF, more critical Polling Stations shall be provided with CAPF and less critical Polling Stations may be provided with mixed or other non-CAPF forces.
Details regarding District Deployment Plan with district profile, route plan, accommodation, transport arrangement and Nodal Officer contact details must be ready before the arrival of CAPFs to the State and shall be shared with them on arrival.
CAPF is not required to be randomized for deployment.
In case of VIP security during election rally, meeting, roadshow etc. CAPFs can be deployed depending upon the threat perception of the VIP with prior permission of ECI.
CAPFs moving to LWE and insurgency areas should be encouraged to carry their BDDS units, equipment and specially trained manpower with them, if available they should also carry force multipliers like Drones, NVD and others with them.
During briefing to CAPFs, previous incidents, mistakes made by forces, threat perception, vulnerability, their duties, DO’s and DON’Ts, terrain, topography, important contact numbers should be briefed and if needed, briefing material should be widely circulated in electronic mode to troops.
SPLITTING OF SECTIONS BASED ON AREA CRITICALITY:
It shall be ensured that not less than one Section of CAPF shall be deployed in LWE/Militancy/Insurgency areas. Half Section of CAPF should be deployed in the areas other than LWE/Militancy/Insurgency areas.
ROLE OF CAPFs:
While deployed for election duty, the CAPF is required to perform the following activities:
PRE-POLL ACTIVITIES:
CAPF shall carry out effective and focused flag marches for area domination, point patrolling and other confidence building measures till 2 days before the polling day (P-2). These forces may also be used as a part of SSTs/FSTs/ QRTs etc. for surveillance purposes. Such flag marches by CAPF should be more on foot; and there should be some interaction with the local population. This will help to instill public confidence in general law and order. The CAPF shall be provided with a list of anti-social elements and vulnerable pockets to keep a watch on unlawful activities. Focus should also be on sanitization of routes specially in IED prone LWE and insurgency areas. Apart from it, a list of precautions, DO’s and DON’Ts should be available with all forces.
POLL DAY ACTIVITIES:
The CAPF shall be assigned duties of accompanying the polling party with polling material to the Polling Station, guarding the Polling Stations, poll materials, polling personnel and keeping watch on the poll process on poll day. For this purpose, the CAPF may be deployed in any of the following manner:
Static guarding of critical polling stations solely and exclusively by CAPF.
Static guarding of polling stations as part of a mixed
(composite) team with local state forces; (iii). Patrolling duty on assigned routes (election sectors) covering a fixed cluster of Polling Stations; (iv). Patrolling duty as a part of FST in a defined area; (v). Escorting duty of polled EVM with polling personnel back to the Receipt Centers/Strong Rooms after polls are over; (vi). Any other duty which is necessitated to ensure the purity and fidelity of the election process.
It will be the responsibility of the District Magistrate and SP concerned to ensure that the polling parties and static armed force reach Polling Stations in scheduled time. CAPF shall be deployed for static duty at assigned Polling Station at least one day prior to poll day. The Sector Officers/Magistrates shall have the details of static force parties that have been allocated to Polling Stations under his charge as per the District Deployment Plan.
POST POLL ACTIVITIES:
Polled EVMs and VVPAT and the polling personnel shall be escorted by CAPF to the Receiving Centers/Strong Rooms. Details in this regard shall be worked out by the DEO and CP/SP in consultation with Observers in advance.
CAPF shall be assigned the duty of guarding the Strong Rooms 24x7, where the polled EVMs and VVPAT shall be stored and kept, till the day of counting (Latest edition ofEVM Manual shall be referred)
It shall be ensured that adequate and fool-proof security arrangements are made inside and around the Counting Centers to prevent incidents that are likely to vitiate the counting process. Sufficient CAPF personnel shall be present at all the Counting Centers for this purpose.
FURTHER DIRECTIONS ON POLL DAY DUTIES OF CAPF:
STATIC DUTY:
CAPF shall take positions in the assigned polling stations, at least one day prior to the poll, for the duty of static guarding of Polling Stations. The CAPF shall be primarily responsible for protecting the Polling Stations, polling parties, polling materials and regulating the entry inside the Polling Stations.
One personnel of the CAPF shall position himself at the door of the Polling Stations (either in static or oscillating mode) in order to observe the proceedings that are going on inside the Polling Stations. (Janak Singh vs Ram Das Rai and Others, CA 9228/2003, SC)
The CAPF staff shall keep an eye on the activities inside the Polling Station and report to the Officer in-Charge of the CAPF or the Presiding Officer, Micro Observer, Sector Officer, General/Police Observers etc., if anything unusual is observed.
CAPF personnel deployed at the entrance of the Polling Stations are expected to keep a watch on the following activities:
No unauthorised person to be present inside the Polling Station at any time during the poll.
Ensure that the polling party or the polling agents do not attempt to cast any vote when no voter is present inside the Polling Station.
No polling officer shall accompany any voter to the voting compartment.
No polling agent or polling officer shall threaten any voter or make any gesture to threaten them.
No arms shall be carried inside the Polling Station.
No silent rigging of the poll process shall take place.
Wherever CAPF is on static duty, in case of any requirement, reinforcements of local police shall be provided.
In cases of disorder/disturbance in Polling Stations, Presiding Officers shall exercise the power conferred under Section 131 of the Representation of the People Act 1951 and use the presence of CAPF/ State Police in case of occurrence of any untoward incident affecting the free and fair poll process. In this regard, there shall be proper coordination between the Presiding Officer and CAPF/ State Police Force posted at the Polling Station. Presiding Officers and CAPF/State Police Force may be briefed suitably for mutual coordination with each other during the poll process. The DEO and CP/ SP shall brief the CAPF/ State Police about this provision.
In case CAPF has not reached the assigned Polling Station, due to any reason, the poll shall not commence in that Polling Station.
State Police Force shall, under no circumstances, replace the CAPFs at the Polling Stations, in contravention of the District Deployment Plan. No officer of the local state police, with or without contingent, shall position himself at the Polling Station and exercise any supervision and control over the CAPF at the Polling Station
MOBILE PATROLLING DUTY:
In case CAPF is assigned duties of mobile patrolling/FST on one or more Sectors, having a cluster of Polling Stations, then the patrolling unit shall ensure supervision and guarding of Polling Stations of that Sectors by assisting or joining the Sector Officers and Sector Police Officers of that Sectors. They shall stay in continuous contact with Sector Officers and Sector Police Officers on that Sectors as well as the Micro Observers and the Presiding Officers of the Polling Stations. They shall also undertake surprise checks on Polling Stations (without entering inside) and report to the District Control Room and/ or senior officers, about their findings.
Mobile patrolling unit of CAPF shall be provided with a list of critical Polling Stations and vulnerable localities falling in the Sector(s) assigned. Such units shall be provided with detailed route maps and contact details of senior officers, officials on static duty and officers specifically assigned to that Sector(s).
ACCOMMODATION, TRANSPORT AND OTHER LOGISTICS FOR CAPF:
Amenities for CAPF during their deployment in the respective States/UTs for the election duty should be as per following minimum standard specified in the Instruction No.464/INST/EPS/2023 (CAPFs) dtd 14th June,2023.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS ON WELFARE MEASURES:
Advance identification of accommodation and a pool of mechanically sound vehicles customised to prevailing weather conditions, shall be arranged for incoming CAPF and communicated to their respective office.
Earmarked accommodation shall be clean and airy having facilities such as adequate toilets/bathrooms, lighting, charging points, cooking fuel etc.
Fitness certificate and security verification of drivers shall be undertaken and ensure that drivers are suitable to drive in difficult terrains especially in the north eastern states.
Necessary fuel (POL) arrangements to be made for the vehicles brought by forces, if any, for duties in the State, along with vehicles provided by the State authorities till final de-induction of the troops.
Meal packets/refreshment charges as applicable to State Police personnel on election duty should be extended to personnel of all the forces being deployed on the polls counting day.
Defense material to maintain law and order, if required, to be provided to the forces that are deployed.
SIM card and/or recharge allowance may be provided to all the Company Commanders as well as supervisory officers.
Spots for stationing of air ambulances and emergency evacuation helicopters to be identified.
As a welfare measure, the Commission has issued instructions to provide honorarium to CAPF personnel deployed for election duty.
The instruction shall be scrupulously followed.
The Commission has issued instructions to grant ex-gratia compensation for polling personnel and security personnel deployed on election duty. This instruction shall be scrupulously followed to promptly pay ex-gratia compensations to CAPF personnel, in case of any eventuality.
Chief Electoral Officers shall plan or do tie ups for cashless medical treatment facilities, in coordination with State/UT Health Departments, in state-of- the-art hospitals for all such personnel deployed on election duty, including CAPF, and who get injured or fall sick while on duty.
PROTOCOL TO BE FOLLOWED IN CASE OF INJURY OR DEATH:
In case of any violent incident/attack involving personnel deployed on election duty (including CAPF), DEO and SP shall take all measures to ensure proper treatment to the injured and a senior official shall be deputed to meet the injured.
The family of the injured shall immediately be informed and arrangements should be made for proper coordination with them.
In case of violent attack or a serious accident resulting in death of any personnel deployed on election duty, DEO/senior officials of the district shall visit the family of the deceased, if living locally, to offer commiserations and ensure that all formalities like post-mortem and shifting of dead body etc. are handled sensitively and without any delay.
In case, the deceased person is from some other district of the same State/ UT or some other State/UT, it shall be ensured that the details are given to the family members immediately. The shifting of dead body to his native places should be coordinated for proper transportation. The CEO of the poll- going State, where the incident took place, shall also inform the CEO of the State/UT to which the deceased person belongs, giving details of the address etc. The CEO concerned should ensure that a senior officer from the district administration meet the family members of the deceased and convey commiserations of the Commission and coordinate the issues of payment of ex-gratia compensation etc.
ROLE OF STATE POLICE.
The local State Police shall remain responsible for maintenance of the general law and order in the entire area concerning the Polling Station as well as the inside and outside of the polling station premises (as different from Polling Stations). Hamlets/habitations within areas concerning Polling Stations that are vulnerable to threat, intimidation and undue influence shall be identified and all necessary confidence building and preventive measures shall be taken in advance. The local State Police shall ensure that there is no hindrance to voters of such pockets in exercising their franchise on the day of poll.
The local State Armed Police (not as part of CAPF deployed by MHA) or local State Police can also get deployed exclusively at Polling Stations, when enough CAPF is not available. This shall however be done according to the District Deployment Plan approved by the senior General Observer and Police Observer of the Commission.
Local State Police Force, if deployed in static duty, shall be through a process of randomization as mentioned below:
Police Constables / Home Guards coming from outside the district can be deployed without randomization.
Lists of constables/Home Guards of a district should preferably be matched with computerised database (e.g. HRMS) of Home Dept, if maintained, to ensure integrity of lists.
In case of Constables / Home Guards of the same District, it would be ensured that they shall be deployed in the Polling Stations falling outside the area of the Police Station where they are presently posted.
As far as practicable, randomization should be done in such a manner that they are posted in the same parliamentary Constituency where they are enrolled as voters to allow them to exercise their franchise through EDC.
COORDINATION WITH GOVERNMENT AGENCIES/ FUNCTIONARIES BY POLICE
Coordination between the Police and other authorities/agencies such as Chief Secretary/Home Secretary, Chief Electoral Officer, Ministry of Home Affairs and various other agencies is essential for incident and error-free conduct of elections. In essence, collaborative efforts and constructive coordination plays a crucial role in upholding the democratic process and ensuring a secure and smooth election process.
Role of Director General of Police in Coordinating with other agencies: (i). Coordination with Chief Secretary/Home Secretary:
To issue necessary notification for appointment of SPNO as per approval of the ECI.
Appointment of State CAPF coordinator, ADG/IG Communications
(Nodal Officer, Communication) Nodal Officer (Election Expenditure)
To discuss matters related to security forces, overall law & order scenario in the state, measures to improve it.
To provide data related to availability of State Police Force and requirement of additional forces from other states to meet shortfall for election.
To send additional forces like home guards available in the state on the demand of other polling states.
To provide approved District Security Deployment Plan and State Security Deployment Plan prepared as per ECI directions.
To participate in Review Meetings/Video conferencing on a regular basis and have close coordination with them.
To place matters of immediate concern on expenditure, procurement, air ambulance, helicopter etc. to strengthen police forces.
To raise issues where there is involvement of other departments for speedy solution and proper implementation like accommodation, procurement, vehicles, telecommunication equipment, drivers, training.
To furnish proposals for appointment of police officers on the direction of ECI and related formalities.
Obtaining proposals for conferment of Executive Magistrate powers on other officers and ensuring conferment of the same.
Issue of notification under Section 28A of the R.P. Act, 1951 for deputation of police officers to ECI.
To ensure movement/mobilisation of State Armed Police Forces for deployment in other states as per direction from MHA.
For budget planning on requirements of both the state police and the CAPF and timely disbursement of amounts in districts.
Collaborate on risk assessments and threat analysis to identify vulnerable areas and potential security challenges.
Coordinate to secure necessary funds and resources for police deployment during the election period and regularly update the Chief Secretary/Home Secretary on resource needs based on the evolving security situation and ensure timely and adequate provisions.
With the DGP of neighbouring states:
Holding inter-border talks with bordering states and doing the needful for inter-state coordination, sealing of borders, interstate nakas, actions against offenders, criminals, liquor mafia who take shelter in neighbouring states.
With Department of Railway: Coordinate to ensure enhanced security measures at railway hubs and during transit to prevent tampering or unauthorised access to election material and for secure transportation of troops from one place to another, loading & unloading of election related cargo from trains adhering to protocols and security checks.
With the Chief Electoral Officer:
Assessment of availability/requirement of forces for elections and sending demand to CEO through SPNO b). To provide a copy of the issue of notification under Section 28A of the R.P. Act, 1951 for deputation of police officers to ECI.
To provide various reports/inputs sought in connection with ECI’s visit and preparation of elections.
To submit enquiry reports on security matters/complaints.
To ensure implementation of directions of the Commission received from CEO f). To send requisition of Helicopter, Air ambulance,water transport etc.
With the State Police Nodal Officer:
To assess data in connection with a multilateral augmentation plan of taking police force/ home guards etc. from the neighbouring State/
UTs, on mutually acceptable terms, for any deficiency in the State Police
Force due to large scale retirements and/or lack of fresh inductions b). Daily review of the meeting of Law and Order and other security issues after the announcement of elections.
Review and assessment of detailed daily Law & Order situations in the State and ensure timely filing of LOR-I and LOR-II.
Attend a review meeting with the Commission.
To send existing local force data in the district along with the requirement of additional forces/Home guards from outside states, if any.
To furnish the CAPF requirement during the election.
To furnish data regarding Critical Polling Stations based on the ECI parameters.
To prepare State and District Deployment Plan with the DEO based on various factors and furnishings.
To send reports of preventive actions, seizures of cases and liquor etc.
To attend review meetings and raise matters of mutual concerns or where intervention is required for border districts, interstate border districts.
For regular coordination meetings involving all concerned agencies to streamline security efforts during elections.
For joint security exercises to enhance interoperability and coordination among different security units.
With the Superintendent of Police/Commissioner of Police:
Coordination with all District SP/ Commissioner of Police on election related issues.
To issue directions on immediate concerns if raised by the CP/ SP through proper channel or bring by other agencies for timely implementation/actions at district level (vii) Other Agencies:
Ministry of Home Affairs:
To obtain Helicopters for deployment in naxal areas, inaccessible areas, to receive intelligent inputs, for coordination on security matters, movement of CAPF/SAP with State Force Coordinator, procurement of sensitive Communication equipment, arms and ammunition etc.
Ministry of Railway:
For movement of CAPF forces by rail from other states.
State Department of Transportation:
To carry out requisition of vehicles, trucks, bus, LMV with skilled drivers for hassle-free movement of security forces within state.
Central and State Enforcement Agencies:
To coordinate with Central and State Enforcement Agencies like Income Tax Department, Central GST Department, State Excise Department, Narcotics Control Bureau, Enforcement Directorate, Railway Protection Force, Central Industrial Security Force, Border Security Force etc. to curb menace of money and muscle power by seizure of contraband items, liquor, freebies, arms and ammunition etc. Sharing of relevant information and providing assistance if required in time.
Department of Health:
For cashless treatment of security personnel and polling parties. Timely agreement with state of art hospitals, procurement of necessary medicine for police personnel, availability of paramedic staff at police headquarters, preparation of medical kits. For availability of air ambulance for timely evacuation f). Department of Communication:
For procurement of Wi-Fi, Wireless system, VHF etc. and to devise engagement strategies that involve the police in educating the public about their role in maintaining a safe election environment and to work together on outreach programmes to build trust and understanding between the police force and local communities.
Establish protocols for crisis communication in collaboration with the police to ensure accurate and timely dissemination of information during emergencies, maintaining public safety and trust. By focusing on these police-centric strategies and collaborations with various agencies, the police can play a critical role in ensuring the security and smooth conduct of elections in India.
Intelligence agencies(Intelligence Bureau/State Intelligence Bureau):
To collaborate on intelligence gathering and analysis to proactively identify security threats and challenges during election period.
National Cyber Security Agency:
Collaborate to enhance cyber security protocols to safeguard election databases, infrastructure, and communication systems against cyber threats. Conduct joint training programs to enhance the cyber resilience of the police force and electoral systems.
District Prosecution Office/ Prosecution Department:
Coordination for quick and timely disposal of previous election related cases and cases of serious nature that may have repercussions on electoral processes.
Civil Aviation Authority:
Coordinate to regulate and secure airspace during elections, especially concerning VIP movements and the airdrop of election materials. Facilitation in movement, evacuation of forces and resources during emergency by Helicopters, Operation of Medical Air ambulances in emergency, develop plans to restrict unauthorised drone usage during the electoral period to maintain security and privacy.
State Fire Services:
Collaborate to ensure fire safety at election venues and storage facilities, conducting joint inspections and providing fire safety training to staff. Develop contingency plans and conduct mock drills to handle fire emergencies effectively.
National Disaster Response Force Authority (NDRF) and State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) authority:
Work in coordination with NDMA to develop and implement disaster response and management plans, considering natural calamities or emergencies that might affect elections. Conduct joint training and preparedness exercises to enhance disaster response capabilities and ensure the safety of electoral processes.
State Excise Department:
Collaborate to monitor and regulate the sale and distribution of alcohol during the election period to prevent its misuse for influencing voters. Coordinate on enforcing strict adherence to election-related prohibitions on the sale and distribution of alcohol.
Role of STATE POLICE NODAL OFFICER:
To raise issues where there is involvement of other departments for speedy solution and proper implementation like accommodation, procurement, vehicles, telecommunication equipment, drivers, training.
To furnish budget proposals for conduct of election and pursue the matter for timely allocation with the Home Department.
Coordination with neighbouring SPNO : In the matter of mutual interest, to synergise efforts to curb money and muscle power, sharing of intelligence inputs.
Central and State Enforcement Agencies: To be in touch with Central and State Enforcement Agencies like Income Tax Department, Central GST Department, State Excise Department, Narcotics Control Bureau, Enforcement Directorate, Railway Protection Force, Central Industrial Security Force, Border Security Force etc. to curb menace of money and muscle power by seizure of contraband items, liquor, freebies, arms and ammunition etc. Sharing of relevant information, provides man and material in time. CP/SP:
Coordination with DEO for election related activities and preparation of District security plan.
Coordination with inter-border and intra-border District SPs on election related matters and swift actions against Mafia, seizures, offenders. To contact them on regular intervals.
Coordination with the department of transportation to plan and secure transportation routes for movement of election materials, minimising risk of tampering or theft, timely deployment of police personnel, election materials and other officials and to respond swiftly to emergencies during such transportation as stated above.
To be in touch with Nodal Officers of other Enforcement Agencies like Income Tax Department, Central GST Department, State Excise Department, Narcotics Control Bureau, Enforcement Directorate, Railway Protection Force, Central Industrial Security Force, Border Security Force etc. and to act in close coordination against muscle and money power.
ROLE OF CS/DGP OF NEIGHBOURING STATE/UT:
Ensure proper coordination with the counterpart of the poll going State for smooth conduct of poll in the Poll going State/UT and participate in Review Meetings/Video conferencing on a regular basis.
Ensure Preventive actions , execution of NBWs, deposition of arms etc. in the bordering districts of neighbouring poll going State from the day of announcement of elections to ensure conduct of free, fair and peaceful election in the poll going State/UT.
Sharing of intelligence on criminals/anti-social elements with the poll going State/UT to ensure peaceful elections.
Action against absconders/history sheeters/criminals involved in electoral offences.
To provide for additional forces like home guards if requested by the Poll going state, based on availability, (vi). Ensure necessary facilitation and provide logistical support transport, boarding etc. to CAPFs that are enroute poll going States.
Ensure setting up of integrated check posts at locations in border areas in close coordination with poll going State/UT.
Ensure sealing of entry points and porous inter-state borders areas to prevent any possibility of bogus voting and entry of anti-social elements in the last 48 hours before ending of the hour fixed for closing of poll.
Maintain vigil at the borders to prevent movement of illicit liquor, narcotics, freebies/inducements etc. in to the poll going State/UT.
Enhanced surveillance at the border areas to carry out seizures of illegal liquor, drugs, cash, freebies, precious metals etc. to ensure inducement free election in poll going State/UT.
Ensure peaceful law and order situation in the bordering areas/ districts of poll going State/UT.
Declaration of DRY DAY in areas along the border districts.
Declaration of PAID Holiday in areas along the border districts.
Appoint of Nodal Officer in DGP’s office for coordination with poll going State/UT.
ROLE OF CP/SP OF NEIGHBOURING STATE/UT:
Ensure coordination with counterparts of bordering districts of poll going State/UTs on election related matters.
Carry out preventive action,execution of NBWs,seizure of arms etc in the border areas so that there is no impact on the polls.
Enhanced surveillance at the integrated checkposts to keep a check on out flow of illicit liquor, narcotics, precious items, cash, freebies etc to the poll bound States/UTs.
Maintain peace in the bordering districts so that there is no impact in the election process of poll going State/UT.

MAINTAINING OF INTERNATIONAL, INTRA AND INTER STATE BORDERS
General The relevant instructions / guidelines issued by Election Commission of India regarding this issue are given in “A manual on force deployment in elections”. Relevant aspects are stated below:
Border Sealing
Border meetings are held between States sharing borders, to seal interstate land borders. The State is also expected to take steps to ensure review of present arrangements of sealing of international borders, if any, and of coastal security in states having coastline either in Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal or Indian Ocean.
The border meetings have to be initiated by the State Nodal Officer for Law and Order and must be held at two levels - State and District.
Each concerned State must give complete cooperation with regard to sealing of borders prior to elections.
Effective checking at interstate Naka’s must take place for antisocial persons, liquor and illegal arms.
CAPF commander may be involved in such interactions.
States must make efforts for neutralising major suppliers of liquor and drugs to election going states. Here it may be pointed out that sometimes the Border States are only transit points, while supply of liquor and drugs may be from a state which does not share a border with the election-going states.
Control on manufacturing of illegal arms and their supply from bordering States to poll going States.
If need be, Border states should also assist in the arrest of absconders/ history sheeters especially who are involved in election related offences in the poll going states.
For curbing muscle power, Border States must ensure that they keep a watch on hiring and bringing in men having criminal background from their states to the poll going states.
Border States to assist in the arrest of persons wanted in prohibition related offences, if they have sneaked into their state.
Border states must ensure availability of dedicated forces in bordering police stations in case of any eventuality and requirement
Strict Excise Department vigil in border states at distilleries so that no proliferation takes place in poll going states.
Use of CCTV coverage at National Highways and State Highways Naka’s.
Border states shall establish checkposts corresponding to checkposts of poll going states at the inter-state borders for effective surveillance.
Inter-State Coordination
For the purpose of smooth and effective interstate coordination, the following steps need to be taken:
The Chief Secretary, Home Secretary, DGP of the bordering States must meet for planning the pre-poll, poll-day and post- poll coordination arrangements, deployment pattern on the bordering areas, preventive action, common concerns such as regulation of inter-state movement of liquor, cash, etc and setting up of complementary checkposts on both sides of the border..
A nodal officer not below the rank of IG (L & O) from each of the States should be in touch on a daily basis for intelligence- sharing and review of steps such as effectiveness of check- points, preventive actions, L & O incidents of concern etc.
The bordering districts should have similar coordination meetings with the DIG, DM, SP of the respective districts meeting for field-level planning and coordination.
Nodal Officers should be appointed by the District Administration of the bordering districts for smooth and effective coordination. ADM who is also the Nodal Officer (Law and Order) and Additional SP may be best- suited for the purpose.
Strengthening of these ‘nakas’ during the last 24/48/72 hours before elections. In this regard, following should be ensured:
That all roads, link roads and ‘kutcha’ tracks having interstate / inter- district links are covered with deployment of sufficient numbers of force.
That all equipment provided at these ‘nakas’ are in working condition.
That police personnel deployed at these ‘nakas’ are aware about the nature of their duty.
Intensive checking of vehicles at these ‘naka’ points should be carried out during this period.
Any information about movement of criminals / anti-social / anti- national elements should be shared immediately with neighbouring States especially to station house officers of adjacent police stations of neighbouring States.
State police will coordinate with the Central Armed Police Force manning the border and agencies of the central government.
Joint committee of officials of the Central Armed Police Force concerned, Intelligence Bureau, Research and Analysis Wing, National Crime Bureau, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (where land ports are available), etc. should be constituted on the day the election is declared by the Election Commission of India. Coordination meetings between the nominees of various stakeholders of this committee should be held regularly.
This committee will meet regularly to coordinate all issues regarding the border management and other challenges like smuggling of drugs, arms, ammunition, explosives, etc. and other security measures to be taken by security agencies in border areas in wake of elections.
Police and security arrangements should be made during this period to ensure maintenance of proper law and order, check movement of dangerous criminals and to check illegal supply of drugs, liquor, arms, ammunition, etc. For this, the security at the International border should be strengthened.
International border (Second Line of Defence)
Comprehensive review of security at border & second line of defence of border should be carried out by abovementioned committees and officials of local District Administration.
Joint control room (State police and Central agencies) should be established, which shall be manned by the officials belonging to above mentioned agencies (both State and Central). This control room should be established on the day the election is declared by the Election Commission of India. There may be more than one such control room depending upon the length of the International border.
Round the clock manning of the Control Room by Inspector rank police officer should be ensured so that any information relating to cross border movement may be shared with various stakeholders on a real time basis.
All important & strategic points on roads leading to the international border should be identified and such points will form part of the second line of defence security setup.
Effective joint ‘nakas’ comprising members of Central Armed Police Force concerned and district police should be deployed. Sufficient number of police personnel should be deployed at these second line of defence ‘nakas’ and special vehicles especially bullet resistant (BR) vehicles should be deployed at these ‘nakas’. Effective wireless communication for all such ‘nakas’ should also be planned.
Proper accommodation and Food/Refresment arrangements should also be ensured for ‘jawans’ deployed at the second line of defence ‘nakas’.
In addition to ‘nakas’ at the second line of defence, surprise ‘nakas’ should also be deployed during night time in border areas to check movement of undesirable elements in border areas.
CCTV camera surveillance system with centralised command centre at district headquarter should be established. Vulnerable and strategic points should also be identified and CCTV cameras should be installed at such places. These cameras should be IP based infrared cameras.
Rapid Police Response vehicles and other vehicles should be placed on strategic points near the border during the night time.
Joint patrolling and checking mechanism in the border area with Central Armed Police Force Concerned should be deployed along the international border.
Regular coordination meetings between local units of Central
Armed Police Force concerned, local Police and other agencies (both State and Centre) should be held on a regular basis to discuss multifarious issues related to security in border areas.
Strict surveillance measures should be deployed at least up to a depth of 1000 metres on Indian side from zero line on the border.
Surprise checkings, ambushes, patrolling, etc. during odd hours especially during night time should be organised.
The Senior Superintendents / Superintendents of Police of border districts should identify vulnerable areas in their respective jurisdiction from where drones / UAVs can be launched and these places should be covered with police patrolling.
Regular meetings with local people should be held to make them aware about various issues relating to security threats in border areas including operations of drones / UAVs.
People of border areas should also be sensitised about this issue and hence community outreach programmes should be devised and implemented by district Police.
Surprise and intensive checking of vehicles in border areas, both during day and night time, should be carried out.
Special combing and search operations at suspicious places shall also be carried out.
The Senior Superintendents/ Superintendents of Police of border districts should identify big smugglers of drugs and weapons in their areas as they facilitate illegal incursions / excursions on the border. They shall mount effective surveillance on their activities.
Intelligence sharing mechanism with local units of State Intelligence wing and Central Armed Police Force manning the borders should be strengthened to counter any security threat emanating from territory of neighbouring countries.
Response time of police should be immediate without any delay as criminals act very fast and in case of delayed response by the Police they are likely to escape from the scene of crime.
Suspicious movement of people near the border and at least 3 – 4 KMs from the border should be checked especially during night time by the local Police.
The Drone target points/landing areas/drone dropping areas from across the border should be earmarked. This is relevant for border areas of Punjab, Rajasthan and Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir.
Sufficient number of strong ‘nakas’ in each border district should be earmarked for search operation by concerned IGP/SSP in consultation with Central Armed Police Force authorities and other central agencies.
The members of Indian Army and Air Force may be included in such a committee where dropping of weapons and drugs by using drones is being practised.
The senior rank police officers should be nominated to supervise special search/ night domination operations near the second line of defence.
Inter State Nakas'
The primary objective of these ‘nakas’ is to prevent criminal activities, arrest movement of dangerous criminals like terrorists, gangsters, drug & liquor smugglers including people involved in smuggling of arms, ammunition, explosives, unaccounted cash, etc. from other states to areas of State where elections will be held. By monitoring the flow of traffic between states, law enforcement agencies can effectively address issues related to smuggling of liquor, drugs, explosives, arms, ammunition and other illegal activities that may occur across States.
During election time, some groups may use illegal services of musclemen and other ‘goonda’ elements for election rigging purposes. More often than not, the musclemen from other states are also invited to rig elections or terrorise voters in the states going for election. Inter-state and inter- district ‘nakas’ play an important role in preventing movement of such dangerous and undesirable elements.
However, it is important to note that the establishment and operation of these ‘nakas’ must be conducted within the legal framework and respect individuals’ rights. Law enforcement agencies must adhere to constitutional principles, such as probable cause & reasonable suspicion when conducting searches and seizures at these checkpoints.
These ‘nakas’ play a crucial role in maintaining security and ensuring compliance with State laws. They serve as a visible deterrent to criminal activities and contribute to the overall safety and well-being of the public. Hence, in order to meet these objectives meticulous compliance of following should be made at these ‘nakas’:
Interstate ‘nakas’, also known as interstate checkpoints, should be established by State police of both the States at interstate borders to monitor and regulate the movement of vehicles and individuals between the States.
These checkpoints should serve various purposes, including ensuring compliance with state laws, preventing the transportation of illegal goods / items and enhancing public safety.
Checking of vehicles and verification of necessary documents such as driver’s licenses, vehicle registrations, permits, etc. should be thoroughly ensured at these ‘nakas’. Vehicles may also be searched for contraband items, such as drugs, weapons, liquor, etc. and apprehend individuals with outstanding warrants.
Modern and state of art CCTV surveillance systems should be installed at these ‘nakas’.
These ‘nakas’ should be established from the day on which the model code of conduct is implemented in the State concerned.
Round the clock inter-state ‘nakas’ should be operational in three shifts.
One non-gazetted rank police officer or head constable and three (3) constables of State police should be deployed at each inter-state ‘naka’ in each shift.
States have evolved various mechanisms at State, District, Subdivision and police station level for districts having an inter-state border for coordination among all stakeholders. To formalize such mechanisms, committees may be constituted immediately on the day of announcement of election. The composition of these committees may be as follows:
State Level Committee
- The overall incharge of law and order setup of the States ( Additional Director General of Police or Inspector General of Police).
- Representative of intelligence / CID setup of the State.
- Range Inspector / Deputy Inspector General of Police of districts having inter-state borders.
- Representative of the Chief Electoral Officer of the state concerned.
- Representative of State Police Nodal Officer for elections.
Functions of State Level Committee
- Ensuring seamless coordination between police forces of neighboring states.
- Identification of potential trouble makers, criminals, smugglers, gangsters, etc. who may try to move in territory of election bound State.
- Collect all relevant details about such criminals and sharing of information about such criminals with neighboring States.
- Sharing of list of parole jumpers, bail jumpers, proclaimed offenders / absconders of both the states and sharing of information about such criminals with neighboring States.
- Sharing of relevant and actionable intelligence regarding movement of criminals, smugglers, proclaimed offenders, bail jumpers, etc. on a real time basis.
- Sharing of details of stolen vehicles which may be used during election time.
- Launching coordinated police operations on both sides of interstate borders.
- Laying of ‘nakas’ in tandem and coordinated manner by police force of both the States so that no ingress to the state remains uncovered.
District Level Committee
- Commissioner of Police/Senior Superintendent /
Superintendent of Police of a district having an inter- state border.
- Deputy Superintendent of Police / Circle Inspector of subdivision having an inter-state border.
- Sub-Divisional Magistrate of Sub-Division having inter-state border.
Functions of District Level Committee
- Identification of location of interstate ‘nakas’.
- Establishment of proper picket (temporary or permanent) at these ‘nakas’.
- Installation of IP based infrared CCTV surveillance system with having connection with centralized control room.
- Providing sufficient hardware and other equipment like barricades, dragon lights, torches, chase vehicles,
video cameras, computers / laptops along with internet connectivity, etc. at these ‘nakas’.
- Organizing joint flag marches and need based search / combing operations in border areas.
- Providing a sufficient number of sniffer dogs (explosive & narcotics) at these ‘nakas’.
- Selection of proper manpower for these ‘nakas’.
- Checking and supervision of these ‘nakas’ from time to time.
Police Station Level Committee and its functions
Police Station Level Committee of Station House Officers of Police Stations having inter-state ‘nakas’ will be constituted to perform following functions:
- Ensuring that all roads, link roads and ‘kutcha’ tracks having inter- state links are covered with deployment of sufficient numbers of force.
- Deployment of police force at these ‘nakas’ in three shifts.
- Ensuring that all equipment provided at these ‘nakas’ are in working condition.
- Ensuring that police personnel deployed at these ‘nakas’ are aware about the nature of their duty.
- Carrying out checking of vehicles, movement of criminals, proclaimed offenders / absconders, parole jumpers, etc.
- Carrying out combing & search operations near the interstate border. It should also be done in a coordinated manner with adjacent police stations of neighbouring state.
- Organization of coordination meetings with Station House Officers of adjacent district of neighbouring State on a regular basis.
- Timely dissemination of information about known movement of criminals to police force of other States especially to station house officers of adjacent police station of neighbouring state.
- Sharing of list of hardened criminals, proclaimed offenders / absconders, parole jumpers, people involved in cases of heinous crime especially during election with Station House Officer of adjacent district of neighbouring State.
- Briefing district and state level committees about activities at interstate border on a regular basis.
Inter District ‘Nakas’
The primary objective of these ‘nakas’ is to prevent criminal activities, arrest movement of dangerous criminals like terrorists, gangsters, drug & liquor smugglers including people involved in smuggling of arms, ammunition, explosive, unaccounted cash, etc. within districts of State where elections will be held.
Inter-district ‘nakas’ play an important role in preventing movement of dangerous and undesirable elements in the State.
These ‘nakas’ play a crucial role in maintaining security and ensuring compliance with State laws. They serve as a visible deterrent to criminal activities and contribute to the overall safety and well-being of the public.
Inter-district ‘nakas’ should be established by the State concerned at borders of districts to monitor and regulate the movement of vehicles and individuals within the States.
These ‘nakas’ should serve various purposes, including ensuring compliance with state laws, preventing the transportation of illegal goods / items and enhancing public safety.
These ‘nakas’ should be established from the day on which model code conduct is implemented in the State concerned.
Checking of vehicles should be thoroughly ensured at these ‘nakas’. Vehicles should also be searched for contraband items, such as drugs, weapons, liquor, etc. and apprehend individuals with outstanding warrants.
Sufficient number of sniffer dogs, if available should also be deployed at these ‘nakas’.
Modern and state of art CCTV surveillance systems should be installed at these nakas.
These CCTV surveillance should be IP based infrared having connection with the district control room.
These ‘nakas’ should be operational round the clock in three shifts.
One non-gazetted rank police officer or head constable and three (3) constables of police should be deployed at each inter-district ‘naka’ in each shift.
Station house officer of area shall ensure the followi9ng:
Station house officers of adjoining districts should coordinate with each other and identify suitable locations for inter-district ‘nakas’.
Proper picket (temporary or permanent) at these ‘nakas’ should be established.
Sufficient hardware and other equipment like barricades, dragon lights, torches, chase vehicles, video cameras, computers / laptops along with internet connectivity, etc. should be provided at these ‘nakas’.
All equipment provided at these ‘nakas’ are in working condition.
Police personnel deployed at these ‘nakas’ are aware about the nature of their duty.
Organization of coordination meetings with Station House Officers of adjacent districts on a regular basis.
Timely dissemination of information about known movement of criminals to police forces of other districts, especially to station house officers of adjacent police stations of neighboring districts.
VIP SECURITY DURING ELECTION
VIP security is a very important aspect in any election related planning. During elections, ensuring full proof security to VIPs like candidates, political leaders, star campaigners and other important political functionaries becomes very important. This becomes even more sensitive and important in areas affected by extremists’ activities, LWE/ extremist affected regions & requires a thorough and detailed preparation, planning, monitoring and effective deployment. The aspect of VIP Security shall not be neglected during the course of conduct of elections as the security forces and other agencies are mainly engaged in various other election related activities and preparations. It is very important that VIP security must be taken with full seriousness and handled professionally.
Following measures are suggested for the same: -
Establishment of VIP Monitoring Cell A dedicated VIP Security Monitoring Cell needs to be made functional at the state as well as district level to coordinate with different security agencies, intelligence agencies, offices of CEO, DEOs, Superintendents of Police, political parties, control rooms and others to ensure incident free foolproof security of the VIPs.
The VIP monitoring cell at the state level should be headed by a sufficiently high rank officer nominated by the DGP of the state. This cell would be the single point of contact for monitoring of VIP movements. This cell will be responsible for making available the security categorisation of the VIPs, pooling of resources, assessment of security gadgets, coordination with CEO’s office, different security agencies like CAPFs, SPG, NSG, VIP monitoring cells of other states, different intelligence agencies like SB, SIB & IB. The state VIP monitoring cell would be guiding and instructing the district level VIP monitoring cell to make full proof arrangements to ensure security of the VIPs.
In the district, the VIP monitoring cell should be headed by at least a DySP rank officer with sufficient and well-trained manpower & resources. The cell at the state level would be responsible for: -
Ensuring availability of security gadgets, security protocols and security categorisation lists and instructions to all those concerned with the VIP security.
This cell should evaluate the threat assessment of the VIPs depending upon security categorisation and the intelligence agency inputs.
Keeping track of the various VIP movements, gatherings, rallies etc. taking place in a day in various places and continuously coordinating with the district VIP monitoring cells, and to guide and take stock of the situation.
At the district level, the district monitoring cells would replicate the above tasks in their jurisdiction to have a full proof security plan at the time of VIP movement. The cell at the district level would be responsible for providing all essential security arrangements to the VIP as per the sanctioned norms and would be solely responsible for coordination for all security related aspects.
Co-ordination meetings amongst different stakeholders:
Coordination meetings of all the stakeholders viz. State police, DEOs, Intelligence agencies (SB/IB, CAPFs/ NSG/ Others/ traffic) etc. are very crucial.
Coordination meetings with different agencies during political rallies and movements like (PWD, building division, contractors, SFs, medical units, intelligence agencies, traffic, local political organizations, other civil agencies etc.) must be organized.
Assessment of requirements
Assessment of logistics like security gadgets and instruments (arms, ammunitions, CCTVs, wireless sets, BP vehicles, BP jackets, jammers etc.) and assessing the availability of fencing, road barriers, security equipment - (DFMDs, alarm systems, HHMDs, surveillance cameras, bomb detectors, NLJD, UVSM, X-Ray scanners etc.), sniffer canines, anti- riot equipments etc.
Threat assessment analysis of the VIPs taking into account his/her security categorisation, intelligence inputs & terrain.
Assessment of logistics and manpower for access control, traffic management, crowd control during rallies, road shows and public gatherings and addresses prior to VIP visit.
Assessment of availability of specially trained quick action teams (QATs), PSOs, medical teams, specialized ambulances, blood donors etc.
Training
VIP security training programmes should be completed prior to declaration of elections.
Training should include: -
Guidelines of Blue Book, Yellow Book ,provisions of the Special Protection Group (SPG) Act, Special Security Schemes and any other latest instructions issued by different state agencies and central agencies from time to time.
Use of different communication devices.
Quick responses during emergency situations and distress.
Security protocols.
Working protocols of different security forces like SPG, NSG, CAPFs etc.
Use of different security gadgets.
Designing of routes and alternate routes for VIP movements.
Threat analysis depending upon intelligence and terrain/ area specially in LWE and extremist affected areas.
Traffic management, crowd control and access control.
Security during roadshows, rallies and public meetings and gatherings.
ECI’s instructions related to MCC on security matters.
Security categorisation
Threat assessment & security categorisation exercises need to be done well in advance with respect to the possible VIPs likely to be involved in campaigning/ rallies during the elections depending upon the intelligence inputs by various agencies (like int. agencies, local police), terrains, extremists / LWE affected regions, previous security threats etc. This categorisation should be shared with all concerned agencies related to VIP security. Security of the VIP has to be provided as per the scale designed. In case of LWE and extremist affected areas there should be flexibility in adherence to security gradation as the need may be more depending on the threat assessment of the VIP.
VIP security in LWE/ extremist affected areas
VIP visits and bandobast arrangements for public rallies should not be left to the political parties, owing to election expenditure booking considerations and citing code of conduct. Security cannot be compromised. To confront this situation following points should be taken into consideration:
Threat assessment: Conduct thorough assessments to determine the level of threat that LWE/ extremist groups pose to VIPs in the region.
Intelligence gathering: Gather reliable intelligence on the movement and activities of LWE/ extremist groups to anticipate potential threats.
Strategic planning: Develop comprehensive security strategies that encompass travel, residence, and public appearances of VIPs.
Close protection: Assign well-trained personnel for close protection of VIPs during their visits to LWE affected areas.
Coordination: Foster effective coordination between local police, central security agencies, and specialized VIP security units.
Route recce: Prioritize thorough recce of travel routes to identify potential ambush sites or threats.
Secure travel: Ensure secure modes of transportation, including armored vehicles and armed escorts, for VIPs traveling in LWE/ extremist affected areas.
Communication systems: Set up robust communication systems for immediate response and coordination during emergencies.
Emergency evacuation plans: Develop well-defined plans for emergency evacuations in case of threats or attacks.
Quick response teams: Maintain specialized Quick Response Teams (QRTs) that can swiftly respond to any security breaches.
Anti-IED measures: Train security personnel to detect and neutralize improvised explosive devices (IEDs) along potential routes.
.Constant assessment: Continuously reassess security protocols and adjust strategies based on evolving LWE/ extremist activities.
Briefing of each and every person concerned with the security arrangements for a VIP programme/ bandobast is a very crucial aspect related to any VIP security plan.

SPECIAL PLAN FOR LWE, INSURGENCY/MILITANCY
AFFECTED AREA
Conduct of peaceful, free, fair and incident free elections in LWE/Extremist affected areas has always been a major challenge in all the past elections. Extremist/ terrorist groups have always opposed the democratic process of elections and have tried to use all possible means like indulging in violence, killings, threats to disrupt the democratic electoral process. They indulge in violent activities during the election: -
- By attacking security forces, their camps, pickets, posts, patrol parties.
- By targeting/attacking civilian authorities involved in electoral process, polling parties, polling officers & election staff.
- By attacking representatives of political parties, political killings, targeting candidates etc.
- By targeting government installations, buildings, booths, railway tracks, roads, bridges and culverts.
- By laying ambushes, IED traps.
These elements indulge in above mentioned activities to deter the government officials, security forces, polling officials from performing their duties and also to threaten the voters from exercising their democratic rights. Hence special plans are required for these LWE/extremists affected areas which are devised taking into account all the above-mentioned difficulties/ challenges in order to ensure peaceful, free and fair election without the loss of man and material.
The chapter provides for general guidelines to be followed in LWE/ Insurgency/Militancy affected areas. However, these guidelines do not in any way supersede or prevail over existing laws, provisions/SOPs, local conventions etc and are suggestive in nature.
Assessment of quantum and type of forces required and logistic requirements.
Large scale manpower and other logistics are required for conduct of free and fair elections. These assessments have to be done at least three months prior taking into account certain factors like
The scale of extremists / terrorists / militants / LWE activities and severity of these outfits active in the area
Violence profile / previous incidents during election and as well as otherwise.
Nature of terrain – inaccessibility, hilly, mountainous, forested.
Availability of basic facility like – transportation, roads, hospitals, government buildings, communication networks like mobile connectivity, shadow areas
Intelligence inputs regarding the extremists/ militants/ LWE activities and their plans to disrupt the electoral processes.
Availability of in-situ forces
Availability of logistics like MPV vehicles, BP vehicles, motorbikes, communication equipment like SAT phones, BDDS teams, and equipment related to IED detection and disposal, special gadgets like DSMDs, Drones, NVDs, area weapons etc.
Assessment of critical polling stations.
Based on the above facts a detailed assessment regarding the available resources and requirements related to manpower and logistics need to be prepared to tackle the special challenges posed by these areas.
Induction – de-induction Plan for the security forces as well as the polling parties and officials related to the electoral process.
It is prepared under two major heads: -
Induction – de-induction plan for the security forces deployed in the district for the conduct of elections.
Induction – de-induction plan for the polling parties and officials accompanied with SFs on the polling day (P), (P-2), (P-1), (P+1) days as the case may be.
Induction – de-induction plan for the security forces deployed in the district for the conduction of elections.
The CAPFs and other specialised forces are generally inducted into the district much prior to the actual polling day for conduct of area domination exercises, demining activities, ROP duties and to create a sense of confidence amongst the voters situated in remote infested villages and vulnerable pockets and they are de-inducted from the district after the polling is over. These forces are generally deployed in extremists/ LWE affected areas which are hostile with tough terrain. Most of the incoming forces are generally not familiar with the local threats, terrain and the tactics of these areas hence a detailed induction and de-induction plan needs to be prepared for these incoming forces. As these forces arrive
in the districts, they should be thoroughly briefed about the security scenario, threats, terrain, possible ambush points, IED threats, vulnerable routes, the extremists groups operating in their area of responsibility, their strengths, details on their weaponry, photographs, previous incidents etc. by senior formations of the district police as well as insitu CAPFs.
Proper area domination exercises, demining exercises, ROP duties should be carried out for their safe induction to their place of deployment.
Local liasoning officers with knowledge of terrain, tactics of the extremists groups, tactics used by the SFs while operating in those areas must be attached with these troops. These teams should be provided with logistics supports like LMPVs/ MMPVs, BP vehicles, BDDS teams, etc. if not available with the team as per the requirement.
Equally important is the de-induction plan for these forces as once the polling part of the election is over, the district administration gets engaged into either next phase of election or counting related preparation and there is a possibility that the-induction process for these forces gets neglected. Majority of the incidents in the past generally have taken place during the withdrawal of the forces. Hence a de-induction plan as thorough as the induction plan is equally important for the forces.
Induction – de-induction plan for the polling parties and officials accompanied with SFs on the polling day (P), (P-2), (P-1), (P+1) days as the case may be.
Induction and de-induction plan for polling parties accompanying SFs like Sector Magistrates, Zonal Magistrates and Polling Staffs on the polling day (P) as well as on P-2, P-1 or P+1 days (as the situation demands) is very crucial for ensuring safety and security of the polling staffs officials and the forces accompanying them and also to instil a sense of confidence amongst the civilians, polling officials & staffs who are mainly responsible for conduction of polls in these hostile extremists / LWE affected areas. All the measures mentioned above for the safe induction and de-induction for the SFs must also be ensured for the safe induction and de- induction of the polling parties.
Course of action in P- 2 & P-1 induction
Due to inaccessibility & precautions required related to the movement, movement on P-2, P-1, P+1 days is also adopted in these hostile areas.
Ensuring adequate food and lodging arrangements.
Conducting advanced recce and intelligence gathering.
Setting up communication networks and establishing coordination with local authorities.
Area domination by special troops and security measures.
Strengthening of security arrangements like setting up morchas, trenches etc.
Planning for alternate induction and de-induction routes
Ensuring safety of EVMs & VVPATs and polling personnel.
Course of action in P+1 & P de-induction
Continuously assessing the security situation during and after the elections to identify any potential threats.
Begin the de-induction process gradually, prioritising the polling personnel & EVM safety.
Prioritising the withdrawal from sensitive or volatile areas.
While withdrawing, ensuring that a certain level of security presence is retained in critical areas to prevent disruption of smooth movement of polling parties.
Maintaining continuous communication with local police stations and senior authorities & staying updated on any emerging security threat perception.
Ensuring comprehensive Road Opening Plans (ROP) to secure exit routes and prevent ambushes or attacks during withdrawal.
Monitoring sensitive areas to identify any potential lastminute disruptions or threats that might arise during the deinduction process.
Planning & preparations for an intermediate strong room (if needed).
In highly extremism / LWE affected areas where it is not possible / feasible to de-induct the polling parties with poll EVMs back to the strong rooms on the polling day itself due to
the grave security threats and possibility of attack , ambush or loss of men and material or due to inaccessible ,difficult terrain preventing de-induction due to very long distances to be travelled back to strong room, in such circumstances planning and preparation for intermediate strong rooms are required to be done .
The DEO and SPs need to pre-assess any such requirement of intermediate strong room in their jurisdiction based on terrain and the security threat assessment and if unavoidable then with the prior permission of the ECI, intermediate strong room locations need to be selected. While selecting such locations, maintaining sanctity of the strong room and security should be the prime factor to be taken into consideration. Preferably a pucca government building with sufficient rooms should be selected which are secured from all sides and with boundary wall preferably amongst the cluster locations already secured by the CAPFs.
Preparation of route map
Detailed route map (both written/ descriptive as well as pictorial) needs to be prepared for all the incoming forces as an integral part of the transportation plan. It should cover all details right from the first point of disembarkation/ deboarding from the railway station/ airports etc. to the district where the forces are deployed. Within the district of deployment, it should cover all details regarding routes to their places of stay, to the dispatch centers, clusters, booths & to the strong room.
It should cover details regarding distances between various places, nature and quality of roads (e.g. metalled, kutchcha, village roads etc), bridges, culverts, diversions, blind/black spots, accident prone areas, traffic congestion prone areas, bottlenecks etc. It should also contain details regarding available petrol pumps, hospitals, police stations, pickets/ outposts/ camps, government buildings enroute.
In extremist/ LWE affected areas, it should include details on ambush prone sites, IED prone areas & details on any previous incident etc.
It should also contain important contact numbers of police stations, hospitals, emergency contact numbers which might be helpful for forces in case of emergency.
These route maps are to be provided to SFs and all polling parties involved in elections.
ROP plan
A comprehensive ROP plan needs to be prepared for
Induction and de-Induction on P-2, P-1, P (polling day) & P+1 days of the polling parties and security forces
For CAPFs, State Armed Forces and other specialized forces deployed in the districts for the entire election process during their induction and de- induction.
The Superintendent of Police needs to earmark separate forces for example in-situ CAPFs, district forces, QATs, etc. for this purpose. The forces should be separately earmarked for this exercise.
Heli-dropping(for clusters/polling stations) Plan :
Many a times due to highly inaccessible terrain, lack of road connectivity, extreme security threat issues, polling parties are directly heli-dropped at certain clusters/booths which are already dominated by SFs to minimise the threat posed by terrain/possible ambushes/IED threats etc.. For this, a detailed heli-dropping plan should be prepared well in advance and prior approval needs to be taken from ECI with justification. Once the list of such booths/clusters where heli-dropping of the polling parties required is finalised, the heli-dropping plan should be prepared in the following manner.
Assessment of helicopter requirements:
Evaluate the necessity of specific helicopter makes and types well in advance, considering actual on-field needs and secure helipad availability.
Present the proposal to the CEO’s office at least a month prior to the polling day.
Trial landings and helipad modifications:
Carry out trial landings well in advance before polling day, so that any modifications/ corrections, if needed ,may be done with respect to the helipads.
Effective allocation of resources:
Requisitions for sorties, transporting EVMs and troops, must be submitted to the office of State Police Nodal Officer, a minimum of 10 days prior to the polling day.
Adherence to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP):
DEOs and SPs have the sole responsibility of ensuring strict compliance of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) - for the heli-dropping plan.
The DEO and the SP also need to work out an alternative plan in case the heli-dropping is cancelled or failed due to certain emergencies like weather conditions, mechanical failures or threat assessment.
In this alternative plan, they will need to work out the ways and means by which the polling parties will be sent to the concerned booths/clusters.
The alternative plan may include: -
● Securing the possible alternative routes to the concerned locations
● Arranging secure convoys for personnel and material with enhanced/ reinforced security along the routes with proper road opening parties.
● Possibility of using alternate secure modes of transport like LMPVs, BP vehicles, bikes, etc.
● Positioning strategically placed QRTs to provide support is also useful.
● Positioning of emergency response vehicles, ambulances etc. to address Emergency situations are also crucial.
● Another important aspect of the heli-dropping plan is the security plan for helipads and the funnel area. Dedicated SF units and nodal officers for securing the helipads and The funnel area is very crucial.
Other important aspects for heli-dropping are: -
Exact GPS coordinates need to be ascertained and communicated to all the concerned.
Dedicated forces need to be tagged with nodal officers and their contact details need to be shared to all concerned officers.
Necessary logistics and adm. arrangements at the site of helipads needs to be accessed and kept in readiness for example smoke candles, fire tenders (if possible)
Wireless connectivity with the ground troops which secure the helipad is essential to communicate with pilots.
Contingency helipad planning The DEOs and SPs need to identify possible helipad locations for evacuation in case of emergencies, attacks, accidents, etc for emergency evacuations. Dedicated nodal officers and forces should be earmarked for contingency helipads so that in case of emergency they can be activated.
Evacuation plan A detailed evacuation plan needs to be prepared keeping in mind two kinds of exigencies: -
Operational exigency
Medical exigency
Operational exigency The evacuation plan for the operational exigency should include: -
Contingency helipad plan for evacuation
QRTs / strategic reinforcement teams to reinforce the parties which need evacuation and support them for safe evacuation.
Positioning of specialised operation teams like CoBRA, SOG, Jharkhand Jaguar, C-60, Greyhounds, etc which can support reinforcement and evacuate the parties.
Road Opening Parties for evacuation needs to be worked out.
Transportation facilities like BP vehicles, MP vehicles, ambulances, bikes, etc to be placed at strategic locations in case evacuation is required.
Identification of alternative routes is also crucial.
Medical exigency In case of medical exigency, for example evacuation of someone who is critically ill or whose life is in danger, following aspects need to be focused on: -
Availability of ambulances
Placing ambulances with life support system at strategic locations
Placing of bike ambulances for inaccessible/difficult terrain
Tagging of the PHCs located in the area and engaging the doctors, paramedics, ANMs available locally is crucial in saving the precious life of the personnel involved in the election process.
A comprehensive area wise list needs to be prepared indicating the PHCs, paramedics, doctors available with their contact details, who can help in emergency situations.
Strategic – reserves/QRTs:
Reserves/QRTs locations for their placement: Identify strategic reserve locations to position Quick Reaction Teams (QRTs) for swift response in case of emergencies.
Nodal Officer to be assigned: Assign experienced officers to oversee the deployment of QRTs and strategic reserves, ensuring effective coordination and decision-making.
Areas of Responsibility (AORs) to be defined: Define clear Areas of Responsibility for each QRT and strategic reserve team to ensure comprehensive coverage of operational areas.
Operational emergency preparedness: Establish protocols and readiness plans to activate QRTs and strategic reserves swiftly in case of operational emergencies.
Task for covering/dominating vulnerable areas during deinduction: Assign tasks to QRTs and reserves to cover and dominate vulnerable areas during the de-induction phase, ensuring security throughout the process.
Demining Plan:
The most potent weapon used by the extremists/militants/LWE against the SFs has always been the extensive use of IEDs. During previous elections as well as non-election times also, SFs have suffered massive casualties/ losses due to the extensive use of IEDs by the extremists. With time the extremists have started using new advanced technologies such as claymore mines, anti-handling devices, pressure IEDs, etc. to inflict damage to the SFs. Hence in order to ensure safety and security of the SFs as well as polling staff/ officials and minimum loss of man and material, extensive demining exercises are prerequisite to any deployment in the areas. For this purpose, a comprehensive training plan needs to be prepared and implemented and demining activities should be repeated continuously. The demining plan should entail the following: -
Expert demining teams: Deploy trained and experienced demining experts who are well-versed in handling various types of IEDs.
Protective gear: Ensure demining personnel wear appropriate protective gears to minimise injury risks.
Detection equipment: Equip demining teams with advanced detection equipment, such as metal detectors and ground-penetrating radar etc. to locate IEDs safely.
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs): Implement strict SOPs for handling, neutralising, and disposing of IEDs, following established protocols to reduce risks.
Controlled environment: Conduct demining operations in controlled and isolated environments to limit potential collateral damage and enhance safety.
Communication systems: Establish efficient communication channels amongst demining teams, security forces, and command centres to ensure rapid assistance if needed.
Evacuation plans: Develop well-defined evacuation plans for demining personnel in case of emergencies or accidental detonations.
Medical support: Have medical teams on standby to provide immediate assistance to demining personnel in case of injuries.
Risk assessment: Prioritise high-risk areas for demining based on thorough risk assessments to minimise exposure to potential threats.
Continuous training: Provide professional training to demining teams to ensure they are well-prepared to handle various IED scenarios safely. Pre- election training of district police, state armed forces is very essential and they should be made aware of do’s and don’t in case an IED is found.
Communication Plan:
A detailed communication plan is very crucial in extremism/LWE affected areas. It acts as a lifeline in such hostile terrains and conditions. It provides real time inputs and is very crucial during operational/ medical emergencies.
Shadow areas: Identify and prioritise shadow areas for focused communication efforts, addressing limited connectivity challenges.
Wireless based: Create wireless communication networks using appropriate technologies to cover regions with poor network coverage. Establishment of secondary control rooms may be considered.
SAT phones: Equip key personnel with SAT phones to ensure continuous communication in areas lacking reliable networks.
Local persons: Collaborate with locals who understand the terrain to facilitate effective information relay and messaging.
Preparation of communication plan during election process is dealt separately in detail in chapter 11 of this book.
Training:
Careful consideration must be given while formulating the training syllabus, encompassing all the important aspects that are immediately relevant for election-related purposes.
Before being deployed, all incoming forces should undergo preinduction training. This training aims to acquaint them with polling booth routes, terrain, tactics required for forces, details on extremist groups, previous incidents, operational tactics, their strength, weaponry, photographs of extremists/LWE and essential operational guidelines, with a focal emphasis on counter-IED training.
Individual districts can formulate training programs based on their local conditions. Identification of proficient trainers and resource persons beforehand is crucial, and they should be assigned for training purposes well in advance.
Training sessions should comprise initial briefings at holding areas followed by practical exercises in the designated deployment zone. The focus should be on instilling precautionary measures, adherence to standard operating procedures, and attaining familiarity with the operational area.
An optimal approach involves delivering training at company clusters, ensuring efficient utilisation of scarce training resources.
A booklet containing area-specific information, along with dos and don’ts, should be prepared in advance. These resources should be available to every incoming force member upon their arrival.
Alongside formal training, state authorities should facilitate consistent and effective briefings.
The acclimatisation of incoming forces should be facilitated by local troops, ensuring their familiarity with the area.
Booklet /Folder A comprehensive booklet/ folder should be prepared and distributed to all stakeholders covering following points: -
Do’s & Don’ts regarding movement in LWE/ extremist affected areas and IED prone areas.
Profile of the active extremists/naxals and their modus operandi and photographs.
Ambush prone areas/IED prone routes mapped in toposheets.
Previous incidents with analysis of shortcomings.
MAPs (AOR) containing previous incidences, vulnerable routes, vulnerable points, clusters, booths.
Contact numbers /telephone directory of the key persons
(district officials, local police stations, doctors, para-medics, local administrative officers concerned with elections, control room numbers etc.)
These booklets should be extensively used in briefing.
12.Adm. Arrangements: SP along with Reserve Inspector/Sergeant Major of district headquarter will oversee proper adm. arrangements including: -
Vehicles: Ensure an adequate fleet of vehicles for transportation of personnel, materials, and equipment across challenging terrains.
Fuel supply: Arrange sufficient fuel reserves to sustain vehicle movement and operational activities throughout the election period.
Defence materials: Adequate defence material for fortifying sensitive locations/ cluster points/ polling stations etc. against potential threats.
Electricity and generators: Set up generators and power sources to ensure consistent electricity supply for communication, lighting, and operational needs.
Water supply: Secure a reliable water supply for drinking, sanitation, and other essential requirements for personnel and voters.
Sanitation facilities: Establish temporary toilets and bathrooms to meet the sanitation needs of personnel and voters at various locations.
Coordination with District Collectors (DCs): Maintain effective coordination with District Collectors to align administrative efforts, resource allocation, and security measures.
Joint Control Room (Composite Control Room):
A Composite control room should be set up consisting of all stakeholders - senior magistrates of district administration, representatives of DEO, representatives of CAPFs and state police for monitoring election processes and exchange of information. It should be functional 24*7 and equipped with all necessary communication devices (telephone connectivity, mobile connectivity, wireless communication etc.) of all units of CAPFs, state forces, medical, fire and other agencies connected with election processes. It should have a communication plan for booths, sectors, zones and others as ordered by the DEO office. It should also be seamlessly connected with 112.
Secondary control rooms should be set up in case of far-flung areas and it should be in regular contact with the composite control room at District.
VIP monitoring cell:
Establishment of VIP monitoring cell A dedicated VIP Security Monitoring Cell needs to be made functional at the state as well as district level to coordinate with different security agencies, intelligence agencies, offices of CEOs, DEOs, superintendent of police, political parties, control rooms and others to ensure incident free full proof security of the VIPs.
The VIP monitoring cell at the state level should be headed by a sufficiently high rank officer nominated by the DGP of the state. This cell would be the single contact point for monitoring of VIP movements. This cell will be responsible for making available the security gradation of the VIPs, pooling of resources, assessment of security gadgets, coordination with CEOs office, different security agencies like CAPFs, SPG, NSG, VIP monitoring cells of other states, different intelligence agencies like SB, SIB & IB. The state VIP monitoring cell would be guiding and instructing the district level VIP monitoring cell to make a full proof arrangement to ensure security of the VIPs.
In the district, the VIP monitoring cell should be headed by at least a DySP rank officer with sufficient and well-trained manpower & resources.
The cell at the state level would be responsible for: -
Ensuring availability of security gadgets, security protocols and security categorisation lists and instructions to all those concerned with the VIP security.
This cell should evaluate the threat assessment of the VIPs depending upon security categorisation and the intelligence agency inputs.
Keeping track of the various VIP movements, gatherings, rallies etc. taking place in a day in various places and continuously coordinating with the district VIP monitoring cells, and to guide and take stock of the situation.
At the district level, the district monitoring cells would replicate the above tasks in their jurisdiction to have a full proof security plan at the time of VIP movement. The cell at the district level would be responsible for providing all essential security arrangements to the VIP as per the sanctioned norms and would be solely responsible for coordination for all security related aspects.
VIP security in LWE/ extremist affected areas.
VIP visits and bandobast arrangements for public rallies should not be left to the political parties, owing to election expenditure booking considerations and citing code of conduct. Security cannot be compromised. To confront this situation following points should be taken into consideration:
Threat assessment: Conduct thorough assessments to determine the level of threat that LWE/ extremist groups pose to VIPs in the region.
Intelligence gathering: Gather reliable intelligence on the movement and activities of LWE/ extremist groups to anticipate potential threats.
Strategic planning: Develop comprehensive security strategies that encompass travel, residence, and public appearances of VIPs.
Close protection: Assign well-trained personnel for close protection of VIPs during their visits to LWE affected areas.
Coordination: Foster effective coordination between local police, central security agencies, and specialized VIP security units.
Route recce: Prioritize thorough recce of travel routes to identify potential ambush sites or threats.
Secure travel: Ensure secure modes of transportation, including armored vehicles and armed escorts, for VIPs traveling in LWE/ extremist affected areas.
Communication systems: Set up robust communication systems for immediate response and coordination during emergencies.
Emergency evacuation plans: Develop well-defined plans for emergency evacuations in case of threats or attacks.
Quick response teams: Maintain specialized Quick Response Teams (QRTs) that can swiftly respond to any security breaches.
Anti-IED measures: Train security personnel to detect and neutralize improvised explosive devices (IEDs) along potential routes.
Constant assessment: Continuously reassess security protocols and adjust strategies based on evolving LWE/ extremist activities.
Intelligence sharing mechanism:
Robust intelligence sharing mechanism with various stakeholders such as central intelligence agencies, state intelligence agencies, CAPFs, State forces, etc. is essential during elections. Timely sharing of qualitative intelligence is very important not just to prevent any losses but to launch an offensive against extremists / LWE groups. Suggestions for seamless intelligence sharing are as follows: -
Secure communication channels: Use encrypted communication channels to transmit information securely.
End-to-end encryption: Apply end-to-end encryption to ensure that only intended recipients can access the information.
Access control: Strictly follow the SOPs for information sharing, allowing only authorized personnel to access specific reports.
Need-to-know principle: Share reports only on a need-to-know basis, preventing dissemination to unauthorized individuals.
Centralized repository: Establish a centralized repository like composite control room, war room with controlled access by authorized users only.
Secure devices: Ensure that devices used to access intelligence reports are secure, have updated firmware, and are free from malware.
Training and awareness: Provide regular training to personnel about the importance of security,intelligence, recognizing phishing attempts, and adhering to proper procedures.
Physical security: Control physical access to facilities housing intelligence data through surveillance and biometric authentication.
Movement-Foot or vehicular naxal/ extremist affected areas.
Vehicular movement should be avoided as far as possible in naxal/ extremist affected areas which are IED and ambush prone and have a history of attack on SFs because of the following reasons: -
Lower Vulnerability to IED attacks: On-foot movement reduces the risk of falling victim to IED attacks, as troops travelling on foot can detect suspicious objects and navigate around them more effectively.
Enhanced manoeuvrability: Walking allows individuals to navigate challenging terrains, narrow paths, and dense vegetation with greater agility, minimising the risk of ambushes.
Reduced detection: Foot movements generate less noise and visual cues, making it harder for adversaries to detect and ambush pedestrians.
Flexibility in route selection: Walking allows for flexible route choices, enabling individuals to bypass risky areas and avoid known threat zones.
Stealth and concealment: On-foot movement enables quieter and stealthier progress, reducing the chances of adversaries detecting and preparing for attacks.
Smaller footprint: A smaller group of individuals on foot is less conspicuous and attracts less attention than a convoy of vehicles.
Reduced collateral damage: In the event of an ambush or attack, on- foot movement minimises the potential for collateral damage to surrounding civilians or infrastructure.
Logistical simplicity: Foot movements require fewer logistical considerations, allowing for more adaptive and agile travel through challenging environment

ROLE OF SOCIAL MEDIA IN ELECTION AND HOW TO
COMBAT DISINFORMATION
Social Media
Information and communication technology has changed rapidly over the past 20 years, with a key development being the emergence of social media. Social media is an internet-based form of communication. Social media platforms allow users to have conversations, share information and create web content.
Social Media in Election
A number of cases of Fake News on election matters are circulated on different platforms including social media. During Elections, the frequency of such fake news increases immensely. Such fake news items have the potential to promote mistrust amongst various shareholders in the electoral process, disturb the level playing field, polarise public opinion and in some cases even result in law-andorder issues.
Social media networks are being used to distribute false information and erode public trust in the media, government, and academia. It is being done to sway public opinion in their favour.
Disinformation
Unverified or unclarified messages are very common on social media. Common names include “misinformation,” “disinformation,” “fake news,” and “rumour”. Among them, misinformation, disinformation, and fake news all emphasise the false nature of information and describe the object of information that has been falsified.
Misinformation often misleads the public to make decisions, causes them to form corresponding actions, and generates emotional and psychological fluctuations.
Categories of Disinformation Clickbait
This uses exaggerated, questionable, or misleading headlines, images or social media descriptions to generate web traffic. These stories are deliberately fabricated to attract readers.
Propaganda
This spreads information, rumours, or ideas to harm an institution, country, group of people or individual -- typically for political gain.
Imposter content
This impersonates general news sites to contain made-up stories to deceive readers.
Biased/slanted news
This attracts readers to confirm their own biases and beliefs.
Misleading headlines
These stories may not be completely false but are distorted with misleading headlines and small snippets displayed in newsfeeds.
How disinformation spreads on social media Continuous sharing
It’s easy to share and “like” content on social media. The number of people that see this content increases each time a user shares it with their social network.
Recommendation engines
Social media platforms and search engines also provide readers with personalised recommendations based on past preferences and search history. This further contributes to who sees fake news.
Engagement metrics
Social media feeds prioritise content using engagement metrics, including how often readers share or like stories. However, accuracy is not a factor.
Hackers
These people can plant stories into real media news outlets, appearing as though they are from reliable sources.
Trolls
Fake news can also appear in the comments of reputable articles. Trolls deliberately post to upset other readers.
Identifying disinformation on social media The first step of fighting the spread of disinformation on social media is to identify fake news. The following are the ways to recognize fake news and identify disinformation.
Check other reliable sources
Search other reputable news sites and outlets to see if they are reporting on this story. Check for credible sources cited within the story. Credible, professional news agencies have strict editorial guidelines for fact- checking an article.
Check the source of the information
If the story is from an unknown source, do some research. Examine the web address of the page and look for strange domains other than”.com” such as “.infonet” or “.offer.” Check for any spelling errors of the company name in the URL address.
Consider the reputation of the source and their expertise on the matter. Bad actors may create webpages to mimic professional sites to spread fake news. When in doubt, go to the homepage of the organisation and check for the same information.
Look at the author
Perform a search on the author. Check for credibility, how many followers they have and how long the account has been active.
Scan other posts to determine if they have bot behaviours, such as posting at all times of the day and from various parts of the world. Check for qualities such as a username with numbers and suspicious links in the author’s bio. If the content is retweeted from other accounts and has highly polarised political content, it is likely a fake bot account.
Search the profile photo In addition to looking at the author’s information and credibility, check their profile picture. Complete a reverse image search of profile photo on Google Reverse Image Search. Make sure the image is not a stock image or a celebrity. If the image doesn’t appear to be original, then the article is likely not reliable because it is anonymous.
Reading beyond the headline
Think about if the story sounds unrealistic or too good to be true. A credible story has plenty of facts conveyed with expert quotes, official statistics and survey data. It can also have eyewitness accounts.
If there are not detailed or consistent facts beyond the headline, question the information. Look for evidence to support that the event really happened. Make sure facts are not solely used to back up a certain viewpoint.
Developing a critical mindset
Don’t let personal beliefs cloud judgement. Biases can influence how someone responds to an article. Social media platforms suggest stories that match a person’s interests, opinions and browsing habits.
Don’t let emotions influence views on the story. Look at a story critically and rationally. If the story is trying to persuade the reader or send readers to another site, it is probably fake news.
Determine if it is a joke
Satirical websites make the story a parody or a joke. Check the website to see if they consistently post funny stories and if they are known for satire.
Use a fact-checking site For election related information, check for ECI/CEO website or ECI official social media platforms for authentic and credible information. Factchecking sites can also help determine if the news is credible or fake. These sites use independent fact checkers to review and research the accuracy of the information by checking reputable media sources. They are often part of larger news outlets that identify incorrect facts and statements.
Check image authenticity
Modern editing software makes it easy to create fake images that look real. Look for shadows or jagged edges in the photo. Google Reverse Image Search is another way to check the image to see where it originated and if it’s altered.
Reporting Disinformation
Once disinformation has been identified, they must be taken down to prevent further chaos. Most of the Social Media Platforms have mechanisms to report disinformation/news that incite violence/spam through their legal portals. Special provisions exist for law enforcement agencies to report violations.
For CEOs/DEOs,the Commission has prepared an SOP for quick response management for identification and quick response in cases of Fake
News and misleading/ unverified media stories. (No.491/ SM/2023/5/ Communication dated 4th August,2023
Initiating Legal action against the source
In India, there is no explicit legislation dealing with false information. The right to freedom of speech and expression, guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) of the Indian Constitution, is the fundamental law that encourages the free publication or broadcasting of news. However, it is important to recall that the freedom granted by Article 19(1)(a) is not absolute and is subject to reasonable limitations imposed by Article 19(2).
Section 66 D of the IT Act 2008 regulates offences related to electronic communication. This includes punishing individuals who send offensive messages through communication services or social media platforms. This act can be used to penalise those who spread fake news through electronic communication.
Sections 153, 153A, 295, and 295A of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), can also be used to combat fake news.
In the case of misleading news, an alternative legal option is to file a defamation complaint.
If fake news is defamatory, the concerned person can initiate a civil or criminal defamation case.
Legal Provisions The Election Commission does not regulate the media. It has, however, the responsibility to enforce the provisions of law or Court directions, which might have linkages with media or certain aspects of media functioning. These laws are mentioned below:
Section 126 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951:
As per Section 126(1)(b) of the R.P. Act, 1951, no person shall display to the public any election matter by means of cinematograph, television or other similar apparatus in any polling area during the period of forty-eight hours ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of the poll for any election in the polling area.
Section 126A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951:
It prohibits conduct of exit poll and dissemination of their results during the period mentioned therein, i.e., the hour fixed for commencement of polls in the first phase and half hour after the time fixed for close of poll for the last phase in all the States and Union Territories.
Section 127A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951:
The printing and publication of election pamphlets, posters, etc. is governed by its provisions, which make it mandatory to bear on its face the names and addresses of the printer and the publisher.
Section 171H of the Indian Penal Code:
It prohibits incurring expenditure on, interalia,, advertisement without the authority of the contesting candidate.
Legal provisions for Hate speech, Misinformation, Fake News etc.
Legal
Brief
Provisions
Section 505 of IPC Statements conducing to public mischief. - (1) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement, rumour or report, with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or community of persons to commit any offence against any other class or community, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both
Section 125 of the RP Act 1951 Promoting enmity between different classes in connection with election
Sections of IPC 153A Promoting enmity between different groups on ground of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony
Sections of IPC 153B Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national-integration.
Section of IPC 295A Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by insulting its religion or religious beliefs
Section 298 of IPC Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound the religious feelings
Section 123(3A) of RP Act 1951 The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the purposes of this Act: —
(3A) The promotion of, or attempt to promote, feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes of the citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community, or language, by a candidate or his agent or any other person with the consent of a candidate or his election agent for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate.
Section 94 of the RP Act Secrecy of voting not to be infringed—
No witness or other person shall be required to state for whom he has voted at an election. 1[Provided that this section shall not apply to such witness, or other person where he has voted by open ballot.
Section 171 C of IPC Undue influence at elections - (1) Whoever voluntarily interferes or attempts to interfere with the free exercise of any electoral right commits the offence of undue influence at an election.
Section 171 G of IPC False statement in connection with an election. — Whoever with intent to affect the result of an election makes or publishes any statement purporting to be a statement of fact which is false and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the personal character or conduct of any candidate shall be punished with fine
Section 126(1)
of RP Act
1951 Silence Period - Under Section 126(1) (b) of RP Act, 1951, no person shall display any election matter to the public by means of cinematograph, television or other similar apparatus in any polling area during the period of forty- eight hours ending with an hour fixed for conclusion of poll for any election in that polling area. Opinion polls are banned during the silence period only.
Section 126 A of RP Act 1951 Restriction of Exit Poll- Section 126A of the R.P. Act, 1951, prohibits conduct of Exit Poll and dissemination of their results during the period mentioned therein, i.e., the hour fixed for commencement of poll in the first phase and half hour after the time fixed for close of poll for the last phase in all the States.
Section 471 of IPC Using as genuine a forged [document or electronic record]. Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine [any document or electronic record] which he knows or has reason to believe to be a forged [document or electronic record], shall be punished in the same manner as if he had forged such [document or electronic record
The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules,2021
An intermediary, (Social media intermediary,a significant social media intermediary), shall follow due diligence while discharging its duties under rule 3 Part II of the IT Rules,2021.
The intermediary shall have a grievance redressal mechanism to acknowledge complaints from a user or a victim within twenty-four hours and resolve such complaints within a period of fifteen days or seventy -two hours from the date of receipt depending on the nature of complaint as specified.
The intermediary shall appoint a nodal contact person for 24x7 coordination with law enforcement agencies and officers to ensure compliance to their orders or requisitions made in accordance with the provisions of law or rules made thereunder.
The Police authorities in coordination with the CEO/DEOs shall establish contact with the nodal person of the intermediary and take down any news related to elections which is against the law or rules.
Circulars issued by ECI with respect to use of Social Media in Election Campaigning
No.491/SM/2013/Communication Dated: 25th October 2013. (pg/107 of the Compendium -link below)
Instructions of the Commission with respect to use of Social Media in Election Campaigning.
No. 491/SM/Comm./2013 Dated: 16.04.2014 (pg/111 of the Compendium- link below)
Clarification regarding social networking sites and E-Papers Regarding.
https://eci.gov.in/files/file/9757-compendium-ofinstructions-on-media-related-matters/
No. ECI/PN/91/2019 Dated: 26thSeptember 2019.
“Voluntary Code of Ethics” by Social Media Platforms to be observed in the General Election to the Haryana & Maharashtra Legislative Assemblies and all future elections.
https://eci.gov.in/files/file/10659-%E2%80%9Cvoluntarycode-of-ethics%E2%80%9D-by-social-media-platforms-to-beobserved-in-the-general-election-to-the-haryana-maharashtra-legislative-assemblies-and-all-future-elections/
TRAINING MEASURES
Ensuring the comprehensive training of police personnel for their role in electoral processes is an essential aspect of election planning and management. Proper training equips them to navigate the complexities of elections, enabling fair conduct, preventing intimidation or electoral malpractice, and upholding the core tenets of credible election.. It is through this training that police can effectively safeguard the electoral process, protect citizens’ electoral rights, and foster a sense of trust and confidence in the entire process.
Training Plan :
DEO:
DEO prepares a training calendar at least 6 months (reference Dos & Don’ts for DEO 2023) before the election. (reference DO & DONTs for DEO 2023). While preparing these training calendars SP should take an active part.
Superintendent of Police:
At least 6 months prior to the announcement of the election, SP office should start the process of categorising police officers according to their roles during the election process. A role-based database should be created at the SP office.
For conducting training of police officers efforts should be made to rely on developed and standardised training modules provided by the CEO office or ECI.
Similarly master trainers should be identified from within police ranks to facilitate the training of the police personnel.
Maintenance of law and order,
Execution of non-bailable warrants,
Seizure of illegal arms,
Surrender of licensed weapons,
Enforcement of excise law,
Action against bootleggers,
Restriction on use of vehicles,
Instruction regarding prior permission for campaign vehicles,
Ban on use of any vehicle for transporting voters on the day of poll etc.
Police officers are assigned various roles and responsibilities during the conduct of elections hence it is important that training is also conducted as per their assigned roles and responsibilities.
A list of training material required along with a detailed lesson plan should be prepared for organising these trainings.
SP should be responsible for ensure training to all the Police Staff is completed by the given timelines
Nature of Training:
Level 1 -
Topics: a recommended list of topics that may be covered are:
● Overview of the Election process
● Model Code of Conduct
● Role and Responsibilities of Police
● Electoral offences
● Preventive Measure
Trainers: District Level master trainers from the police dept.
Target Audience: All police officers of the district. This contains general information about the model code of conduct and electoral malpractices that every police officer from Police Nodal Officer to Police constable should know. This may be done through an online eLearning portal which is self-paced.
Timeline for training & methodology: A draft lesson plan is attached below as Annexure A
Training must start by: P - 75 Days (P – Date of Poll)
Training must end by: P - 60 days
Level 2 Training: These are thematic and role based.
List of Level-2 Trainings
Police officers deployed in polling stations
Sector Police Officer
Police officials deployed with a flying squad.
Police officials deployed with static surveillance team
Supervisory Officer Training
Dy. SP, PI & PSI
Police station Staff
SP
SP office Election Cell
State Police Nodal Officer
Other Nodal Officers
State Nodal Officer for Training
Nodal Officer (EVM/ VVPAT Security, Induction/De-induction of CAPF and Welfare)
Postal Ballot
SVEEP Activities
Social Media Monitoring & Cyber Crime
Web Portal Management and Daily Reports
Communication Plan
Inter-State Border Coordination
Thematic Training
CAPF Training
Police officers deployed in polling stations:
Topics: Proposed topics:
● Tempering of seals/malfunctions of EVMs.
● Role and Responsibilities of Presiding Officer.
● Role and Responsibilities of Polling Booth Staff.
● Procedural details of the conduct of the poll.
● Protocols about the EVM/VVPAT Management.
● Relevant sections of Indian Penal Code.
● R.P Act
● Provisions of Model Code of Conduct (MCC) With special focus on the nature of offence and the relevant Sections whether cognizable or non-cognizable and the action to be taken in case of any violation.
● Role and responsibilities of the Sector Officers.
● Roles and responsibilities of Micro-Observers.
● A refresher handbook/ booklet of DOs & DONTs for police staff at polling stations must be provided to the police personnel attached to the polling station.
Trainers: District Level master trainers from the police dept.
Target Audience: For training staff and CAPF forces deployed as static guard to polling stations level-2 training should be provided after completion of level-1 training.
Timeline:
Training must start by: P - 30 days (P – Date of Poll)
Training must end by: P - 20 days Methodology:
A reference material should also be prepared both for state and central police, indicating the relevant sections of Indian Penal Code, the R.P Act and provisions of Model Code of Conduct (MCC) that are relevant during the course of elections. A sample lesson plan is attached below as Annexure B
Sector Police Officer:
Topics:
● The police officer must also be aware about the protocols regarding EVM/VVPAT Management.
● Role and responsibilities of the Sector Officers.
● Electoral roll of each of the PS; with hamlet name etc. to enable them to contact voters of every section in the part.
● Polling Station Wise Assured Minimum Facilities (AMF)
● Voter turn-out of AC and of polling stations of that sector (for last 2 general elections) and Gender ratio
● MCC violation cases of that sector (for last 2 general elections)
● Identification of Vulnerable Areas/Segments/Villages/ Hamlets
● Methodologies to conduct widespread discussions with the local people
● Methodologies for collection of intelligence.
● Methodologies for enlisting the vulnerable households and families.
● Filling of various forms mentioned in the manual of vulnerability mapping Edition-2 2023.
Trainers: District Level master trainers from the police dept.
Target Audience: Sector Officers Timeline:
Training must start by: P- 60 days (P – Date of Poll)
Training must end by: P - 45 days Methodology:
A sample lesson plan is attached below as Annexure C.
Police staff deployed with flying squads:
Topics:
● Violations of Model Code of Conduct, ● Violations of relevant sections of Indian Penal Code
● Violations of relevant sections R.P Act
● Complaint Monitoring - Process, Dos & Don’ts
● Electoral malpractices - frequent scenarios of bribery like Distribution of liquor etc.
● Expenditure Monitoring
● Permissions for Rallies and Political Functions, ● Movement of star campaigners etc.
Trainers: District Level master trainers from the police dept.
Target Audience: Members of the Flying Squads. As soon as flying squads are constituted a dedicated combined training of all members of the flying squad should be conducted by the DEO. SP should ensure that all police officers deputed for flying squad duty are adequately trained in this training session.
Timeline:
Training must start by: P- 60 days (P – Date of Poll)
Training must end by: P - 45 days
Police staff deployed with statics surveillance team:
Topics:
● SOP for vehicle checking, ● Maintenance of records, ● Audio visual recording of checking, ● Electoral malpractices, ● Guidelines of movement of cash and goods, ● Movement of star campaigners and political functionaries, ● Role of static surveillance team during passage of VIP convoys.
Trainers: District Level master trainers from the police dept.
Target Audience: Members of the SSTs. After the establishment of check post in the border of a district, all police staff as well as the staff of other department that are being deployed or will be deployed in the future must be trained.
Timeline : Training must start by: P- 60 days (P – Date of Poll)
Training must end by: P - 45 days
Supervisory officer training Topics:
● Expenditure Monitoring: Various methods of inducement of Voters and the legal guidelines in the form of ECI directions and instructions on the subject.
● Investigation of Electoral offences and Complaint Monitoring system:
Tracking of election related violence and offence
● Model Code of Conduct Monitoring and Violations
● Defacement of public property: The Election Commission has been issuing detailed instructions regarding prevention of Defacement of Public Property and other connected issues from time to time. The steps to be taken to implement the Commission’s order in the context of prevailing law, if any; applicable to the State should be properly explained.
● Flying Squads and Static Surveillance Teams (SSTs)
● Inter-State Border Check Post Operations
● Control Room Operations
● Prohibition & Excise
● Election Cell Management
● Police Patrols & Coordination with Executive Magistrates
● Security to Candidates/Observers
● Strong Room Security & Security of EVM/ VVPAT in transit
● Incident Reporting Poll Day Duties
● Web Portal Management and Daily Report Compilation
● Security at the Polling Stations
● Coordination with CAPF/SAPF, Presiding Officer & Polling Staff: Role and Responsibilities in relation to each should be emphasised
● Do’s & Don’ts for Security Staff
Trainers: District Level master trainers from the police dept.
Target Audience: All supervisory officers (Addl SP, DySP, Inspectors and PSI) and staff at the Police station level involved in elections must receive this training.
Timeline: Training must start by: P - 45 days
Training must end by: P- 40 days
Training of SPs:
Topics:
a. Training of District Election Management Plan.
● Polling Station Plan
● Manpower plan
● Training plan
● Movement Plan
● Force Deployment plan
● EVM Management Plan
● Miscellaneous (special focus on role of police in facilitating these activities) - SVEEP, Material Procurement, risk management Plan, Technology Use plan, Distribution Centre- Reception Centre etc
● Counting Day Plan
● Nomination Period Security Plan
● Poll Day Plan
● 72 Hours Security Plan
● Police staff Welfare Plan
● Health, First Aid and Evacuation Plan
● Flying Squads and Static Surveillance Teams (SSTs)
● Inter-State Border Check Post Operations
● Coordination with CAPF/SAPF, Presiding Officer & Polling Staff: Role and Responsibility in relation to each should be emphasised.
b. Training of expenditure monitoring:
● Exposure to various methods to induce the voters
● Training regarding the working of the excise machinery
● Information on the Commission’s instructions about ceiling of expenditure
● Information on the Commission’s instructions about the details of Section 77 of R.P Act regarding the list of star campaigners to be submitted by the recognized party and the implications
● Guidelines for proper investigation is essential to establish linkage between the election process and the various forms of illegal inducements
● Guidelines for proper investigation in violations of Section 171 H which deals with the illegal payment by any person for furthering interest of a candidate
c. Training on vulnerability mapping, critical polling stations and preventive measures:
● Introduction to the concept of vulnerability mapping
● Process for identifying the critical polling stations and critical clusters
● Chapter V of Force Deployment manual. Reference Letter No. 464/L&O/2023/EPS(VM) dated 21.06.2023 and Manual on vulnerability mapping.
d. Postal Ballot
● SP should organise a training programme for all employees including police personnel and police drivers for the purpose of facilitation of postal ballots
● A nodal officer should be appointed in the DEO office for any doubts or coordination related to postal ballots.
e. Training on Investigation of Electoral Offences and MCC Violations: ● Tracking of election related violence and offence, ● Monitoring of Investigation and prosecution.
● Database for Preventive action by police should be maintained.
● Documentation of criminal antecedents of past offenders and the preventive action taken against them.
Trainers: State Level master trainers from the police dept.
Target Audience: SP Timeline:
Training must start by: Should start by date of poll - 4 months
Training must end by : P- 3 months
SP Office Election Cell Topics:
● Preparation of District Election Management Plan.
● Polling Station Plan
● Manpower plan
● Training plan
● Movement Plan
● Force Deployment plan
● EVM Management Plan
● Miscellaneous (special focus on role of police in facilitating these activities) - SVEEP, Material Procurement, risk management Plan, Technology Use plan, Distribution Centre- Reception Centre etc
● Counting Day Plan
● Nomination Security Plan
● Poll Day Plan
● 72 Hours Security Plan
● Police staff Welfare Plan
● Health, First Aid and Evacuation Plan
● Monitoring of enforcement of MCC i). Monitoring of Complaint Monitoring System in the district ii). Maintaining the database of history of electoral offences.
iii). Vulnerability mapping and identification of critical polling station:
iv). Monitoring Expenditure Monitoring v). Monitoring of issues related to defacement of public properties vi. Coordinate with the CAPF:
Preparation of material to be given to the CAPF, that is: list of vulnerable pockets, terrain and weather condition of the district, list of PS and locations, communication plan,
Do’s and don’ts for the CAPF,
Plan for pre-poll deployment, etc.
vii. Directory of electoral administration: A directory of key functionaries of the electoral administration both civil and police should be prepared indicating the names, designation, landline and mobile numbers for better coordination between civil & police authorities.
This directory should be handed over during training to all key personnel; and also to the senior CAPF personnel.
viii. Postal Ballot:
Facilitation centre organisation Management and coordination with the DEO office.
Trainers: District Level master trainers from the police dept.
Target Audience: All Staff of the SP Office Special Cell Timeline:
Training must start by: Should start by date of poll - 4 months Training must end by : P- 3 months
Police Nodal Officers:
Topics:
Broadly the training is categorised in
Vulnerability Mapping and confidence building measures ii) Identification of critical polling stations and critical clusters.
iii) Preventive Measures – special drives iv) Misuse of money power and election expenditure.
Prevention of Defacement of Public properties.
vi) Discipline during nomination process. vii) Communal harmony. viii) Poll day and counting day duties.
ix) CAPF coordination and Deployment of force
MCC provisions xi) Poll process xii) Relevant legal provisions xiii) Other Issues
Trainers: State level police Nodal officer must be trained by India
International Institute of Democracy and Election Management
Target Audience: SPNO
Timeline: At least 4 months prior to elections
Other Nodal Officers
State Nodal Officer for Training: The State shall appoint a senior officer, not below the rank of IGP, preferably the ADGP/IG Training; as the Nodal Officer at State level to arrange, oversee, prepare content, monitor and report the training of the state police forces. The senior Police officer who would function as nodal officer should remain in touch with the CEO on a day-to-day basis; so that the Commission’s instructions from time to time are followed up and implemented.
Training Calendar: Prepare Training Calendar in coordination with Chief Electoral Officer and State Police Nodal Officer for the training of Commissioners of Police/ Heads of Range/ Superintendents of Police/ Commandants/Sub-Divisional Police Officers/Station House Officers
Levels of training: Training will be organised at two levels at the state level at Police HQs; and at the district level, which will include Block/Tehsil/Taluka level.
- Content: Standardised, high quality and need- based training should be imparted; this should include giving of handbooks, and other training material such as pocket books, Flyers, etc.
● Checklists: A checklist will be prepared/ updated for the key officials associated with the conduct of election indicating their duties and responsibilities in the light of instructions being issued from the Election Commission of India from time to time.
● Reference material: Besides, reference material should also be prepared indicating the relevant Sections of various Acts that are relevant during the course of elections. It should indicate the nature of offence and the relevant Sections whether cognizable or non-cognizable and the action to be taken in case of any violation and should be made available to all.
Trainers: State level Master Trainers Target Audience:
● Trainees from state police: In a general election, all members of the State Police Force from top to bottom shall undergo relevant training.
● Other trainees: Similarly, all members of the State Armed Police and Home Guards shall also be given relevant training.
Timeline:
Training must start by: As soon as appointed Training must end by: P-60 days b). Nodal Officer (EVM/ VVPAT Security, Induction/De-induction of CAPF and Welfare)
Training should focus on their role of
● Coordination with IGP (Ops), CAPF, MHA, New Delhi and for making logistical arrangements for their movement & stay
● Welfare of force deployed for Election Bandobast (Police/SRPF/
CAPF /HG/ GRD/SRD etc.)
● Safety & Transportation of Electronic Voting Machines & VVPAT c). Nodal Officer (Postal Ballots and e-Payment) Training should focus on their role regarding:
● Data Base & Postal Ballot Papers for Police Force /SRPF/Home Guards / GRD/ SRD etc.
● Data Base & Postal Ballot Papers for Police Force /SRPF/Home Guards / GRD/ SRD (Out State Duty)
● E-Payment of honorarium to Police Force /SRPF/Home Guards / GRD/ SRD etc.
Nodal Officer (SVEEP Activities)
Training should focus on their role of Coordination with Chief Electoral
Officer regarding organising of SVEEP activities at State/District level e). Nodal Officer (Social Media Monitoring and Cybercrime) Training should focus on their role of
● Monitoring of SMS, Facebook, Instagram, Tweeter and other Social Media Platforms regarding online campaign activities
● Monitor Cyber contents regarding objectionable contents in the context of elections
● Coordinate with Districts for taking action in coordination with CERT. IN and other agencies.
Nodal Officer (Web Portal Management & Daily Reports) Training should focus on their role of Coordinate with Districts for collection of data related to Law & Order Report I & II and submission of Daily Reports g). Nodal Officer (Communication Plan)
● Training should focus on their role of Mobilising resources, ● Identify black spots/shadow areas and
● To workout Communication Plan in coordination with State Police
Nodal Officer h). Nodal Officer (Inter-State Border Coordination)
● Training should focus on their role of Coordination with neighbouring States/ UTs regarding setting up of Inter-State Border Check Posts, ● Role of Coordination in arrest of Inter-State Criminals, ● Coordination on issues related to deposition of licensed arms, dry day, sharing of intelligence etc.
Suggested topics for thematic Training: Topics: Some Suggested topics are
● EVM
● Election Management
● Polling process
● Model code of conduct
● Vulnerability Mapping and Critical Polling Stations
● Postal Ballot
● Preventive action
● Monitoring of past cases
● Law and Order reporting
● Investigation of Electoral Offence
Trainers: State level master trainers
Target Audience: Any
Timeline: As an when the need arises Methodology: E-content or Offline Modules
CAPF Topics:
Induction Training: Induction Training of the Para Military Officers should include the following topics:
● Security profile of the election bound State/Area
● Special reference to challenges to internal security like LWE, Militancy/ Insurgency.
● Infrastructure profile.
● Preliminary post deployment Plan
● Vulnerability mapping and details of critical polling stations Special Induction Training in LWE areas:
● Familiarization/induction training for Coys coming for election duties in LWE/Insurgency/Militancy affected area shall be planned.
● Pre-Induction training of all the arriving forces should be conducted for the specified period to familiarise them with routes to polling booths.
● Familiarisation of tactics, terrain, incident history, modus operandi of Maoists
● Necessary do’s and don’ts for operating in the area.
● Focus should be on counter IED training.
● Precautions to be taken, SOPs to be followed, ● Understand the area where they are going to be deployed
● Dos & Don’ts and area specific information brochure should be prepared in advance and made available to each force on its arrival.
Trainers: District Level master trainers/ State level master trainers from the police dept.
● Specialised training may be done for Each district based on its local conditions. Resource persons and best trainers should be shortlisted much in advance and deployed for this purpose.
● Training should be ideally imparted at coy clusters to rationalise on scarce training resources.
● Trainers to be deputed from training institutes.
Timeline: Duration of such training may vary, depending upon violence profile of the area.
● Training syllabus for induction should be designed for 3-7 days depending upon the exposure of the forces to similar field threats. Training must start by: Immediately on arrival Training must end by: Date of poll - 20 days
Training of Master Trainers / Training of Trainers (ToT) Topics : All topics
Trainers: State Level master trainers or IIDEM
Target Audience: A resource pool of master trainers must be created and regularly trained. Minimum strength of at least 5 per district should be created. These Trainers should be from the Police department and also must have exposure to the investigation and prosecution of electoral malpractices in their working
Timeline: They must be given refresher training at least 4-6 months prior to the schedule of the elections. Training cell at the state police headquarters must maintain the list of such Master trainers and ensure that upgradation of their skill happens regularly.
Training must start by: Date of poll - 6 months
Training must end by : Date of Poll - 4 months
General guidelines in relation to conduct of training:
● Hands on Training: Police officers should also be given exposure to thereal working EVM / VVPAT. A model kit involving polling materials for use of polling parties must be provided at the training venue so that a detailed demo can be provided at another time of training.
● Training Size: All training programmes should be done in a group of less than 50 trainees.
● All training programmes should be video recorded.
● Training counter at the dispatch centre
● Training counter at the dispatch centre / Doubt clearance facility: There should be a doubt clearance facility at the end of every training.
● At the level of SP office, a special cell should be created for clearing of the doubts of police staff and officers.
● Training counter and doubt clearing opportunity should be provided at the dispatch centre: In this counter, a master trainer who has thorough knowledge about all the aspects of election matters can be posted.
● Sensitization: Sensitization of police personnel about special needs of people with disability must be emphasised.
● Facilitation Centre: Proper facilitation for reporting and attendance of police personnel at training venues must be ensured.
● Accountability for imparting training
● Infrastructure at Training Centres: At training locations proper facilities for drinking water, vehicle parking, help desk, provisions for medical facilities and toilets should be ensured.
● Evaluation must be conducted after training.
Timeline
Handbook of returning officer mentions the timeline for training of police officer:
Start
Day End Day
Training of Police Personnel (At District Level) P-40 P-39
At Sub Div. Level P-35 P-35
At Police Station Level P-30 P-30
Police Training P-30 P-30
Sector P-36 P-35
Infrastructure for CAPF camps (by Police) P-50 P-45
Interface with Police - Nomination/ MCC/ Exp.
Mon/ Single Window System P-45 P-44
P means Poll Day.
According to Manual on force Deployment
Personnel to be trained Training Place Training Date Line
State Level Master Trainers IIIDEM, New Delhi 4 months before the poll
Range IGs, SPs, Addl SPs State PHQ 2 months before the poll
Deputy SPs, Inspectors, SHOs, Police Sub- Inspector /Incharge Police lines District 1-2 months be- fore the poll
Police constables and Head constables, all other police personnel (including CAPF) to be deputed in polling stations, mobile parties Sub Division/
Thana level/ Po- lice line/ Area of deployment 1 month before the poll
Proposed Timelines are:
At location Start Day End Day
Training of Police
Personnel
Level 1 At their respective locations Preferably through e-Learning P-75 P-60
Police officers deployed in polling stations Districts P-30 P-20
Sector Police Officer District P-60 P-45
Police staff deployed with flying squad District P-60 P-45
Police staff deployed with static surveillance team District P-60 P-45
Supervisory Officer
Training Dy. SP, PI &
PSI District P-45 P-40
Supervisory Officer
Training Police station
Staff District P-45 P-40
SP office Election Cell District P-120 P-90
SP State P-120 P-90
Police Nodal Officer Training IIDEM 6 months before poll 4 months before poll
Other Nodal Officers State As soon as appointed P-60
Thematic Training Any location Any Time Any Time
CAPF Training State or District On arrival P-20
TOT/ Master Trainers IIDEM/ State 6 mn 4 mn
Annexure A
Level 1 Training : Introduction to Statutory Provisions and Preventive Measures in Election Management
Duration: 3 hours
Target Audience: All Police officers involved in election management Learning Objectives:
By the end of this session, participants should be able to:
Understand the key statutory provisions related to election management in India.
Recognize their roles and responsibilities in maintaining law and order during elections.
Identify and apply relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), Representation of the People Act, 1951, and Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) in election-related situations.
Lesson Plan:
Welcome and Introduction (15 minutes) o Brief introduction of the training session.
o Overview of the importance of police officers’ roles during elections.
Overview of the Election Process (15 minutes) o Provide an overview of the entire election process, including pre-poll, poll day, and post-poll activities.
o Explain the importance of each phase in the electoral cycle.
Statutory Provisions (45 minutes) o Explanation of the Representation of the People Act, 1950:
● Section 13CC: Control and discipline of Chief Electoral
Officers, District Election Officers, and election staff.
o Explanation of the Representation of the People Act, 1951:
● Section 28A: Control and discipline of election officers, including Returning Officers, Presiding Officers, and police officers.
o Overview of other laws relating to elections, including the Arms Act, Motor Vehicle Act, Prevention of Defacement Act.
o Discuss the importance of these provisions in ensuring the integrity of elections.
Statutory Provisions (Contd.) (45 minutes) o Detailed explanation of key sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) related to elections:
● Sec-171-D: Impersonation at elections.
● Sec-171B: Bribery.
● Sec-171C: Undue influence at elections.
● Sec-171G: False statement in connection with an election.
● Sec-171H: Illegal payments in connection with an election.
● Sec-171I: Failure to keep election accounts.
● Sec-505(1)(b): Offence against public tranquillity.
● Sec-153A: Promoting enmity between different groups.
● Sec-153AA: Punishment for carrying arms in any procession.
● Sec-153B: Imputations prejudicial to national integration.
o Discuss real-life scenarios and case studies related to these sections.
Representation of the People Act, 1951 (45 minutes) o Explanation of key sections related to corrupt practices and election conduct:
● Sec-123: Corrupt Practices.
● Sec-125: Promoting enmity between classes.
● Sec-127: Disturbances at election meetings.
● Sec-130: Prohibition of canvassing in or near polling stations.
● Sec-132: Penalty for misconduct at the polling station.
● Sec-134B: Prohibition of going armed to or near a polling station.
● Sec-135: Removal of ballot papers from polling station.
● Sec-135A: Offence of booth capturing.
● Sec-126: Prohibition of public meetings during the silence period.
● Section 126A- Restrictions on dissemination of results of exit polls.
● Section 135-B- Grant of paid holiday to employees on poll day.
● Section 135-C – Prohibition on sale/distribution of liquor during the last 48 hours.
● Sec-127A: Restrictions on the printing of pamphlets, posters, etc.
● Sec-128: Maintenance of secrecy of voting.
o Discuss the significance of these provisions in maintaining a fair electoral process.
Legal Provisions Related to Preventive Measures (45 minutes) o Overview of relevant sections of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC):
o Sec-20 to Sec-154: Executive Magistrates, arrest, detention, search, and related powers.
o Explain when and how these provisions apply during elections.
o Discuss the importance of maintaining public order and preventing offences during elections.
Poll Day Scenarios and Practical Application (30 minutes) o Present various poll day scenarios, including crowd control, security breaches, and emergencies.
o Discuss and analyze the appropriate responses and actions that police officers should take in each scenario.
Case Studies and Practical Application (30 minutes) o Present case studies and scenarios for participants to apply their knowledge of statutory provisions and preventive measures.
o Encourage group discussions and problem-solving.
Q&A and Wrap-Up (15 minutes) o Open the floor for questions and clarify any doubts. o Summarize the key takeaways from the session.
Distribution of Reference Materials (if available) (15 minutes) o Provide participants with printed or digital reference materials for their further study and reference. Annexure B
Training of static team on Polling Station Security and Enforcement of Code of Conduct
Duration: 3 hours
Target Audience: Police personnel posted at polling stations Learning Objectives:
By the end of this session, participants should be able to:
Understand their roles in ensuring the security and integrity of the polling station.
ii). Comprehend the specific tasks related to the enforcement of the code of conduct at polling booths as per Election Commission of India (ECI) norms.
iii). Be familiar with the actions required for area domination and strategic deployment.
iv). Know how to respond to incidents and emergencies during polling. Lesson Plan:
Welcome and Introduction (10 minutes) o Welcome participants and introduce the session’s objectives.
o Highlight the importance of their role in maintaining the integrity of the electoral process.
Enforcement of Code of Conduct (20 minutes) o Discuss the importance of strict enforcement of the code of conduct at polling booths, as per ECI norms.
o Break down the key tasks related to code of conduct enforcement, including:
● Keeping party booths at a minimum distance.
● Regulating the number of chairs and tables at party booths.
● Preventing posters and crowding.
● Managing the queue of voters.
● Ensuring proper conduct of polling agents.
● Restrictions on specific individuals becoming polling agents.
● The handling of electoral lists.
● Rooftop armed duties on sensitive booths.
● Voter frisking procedures.
Role-Play Exercise 1: Managing Queue and Crowd Control (15 minutes) o Divide participants into groups.
o Provide each group with a scenario related to managing the queue and controlling crowds at a polling station.
o Participants must act out the scenario, applying code of conduct enforcement principles.
Role-Play Exercise 2: Mock Polling Booth Operation (30 minutes) o Have participants take turns acting as polling officers, voters, and security personnel.
o Simulate the entire polling process, including checking voter IDs, issuing ballots, and maintaining order within the polling booth.
o Emphasise the importance of adhering to code of conduct norms during this exercise Deployment (20 minutes) o Discuss the importance of personnel knowing the location of essential facilities and resources.
o Emphasise the need for prompt communication in case of trouble.
Restrictions on Movement of Vehicles (15 minutes) o Discuss the restrictions on vehicle movement as per ECI guidelines.
o Explain the criteria for allowing vehicles to ply, including permits and authorised passengers.
o Highlight the importance of displaying a u t h o r i s e d personnel’s photographs on vehicles.
Case Scenarios and Practical Application (15 minutes) o Present hypothetical situations and scenarios related to polling station security.
o Encourage participants to apply the knowledge gained to make decisions in these scenarios.
Q&A and Wrap-Up (15 minutes) o Open the floor for questions and clarifications.
o Summarise key takeaways and emphasise the importance of their role in ensuring a fair and peaceful election.
Annexure C
Training for Sector Mobile Duties and Responsibilities during Elections Duration: 2 hours
Target Audience: Police personnel assigned to sector mobile during elections Learning Objectives:
By the end of this training session, participants should be able to:
Understand their roles and responsibilities as part of a sector mobile during elections.
Familiarize themselves with the key duties related to escorting polling materials, personnel, and maintaining security.
Familiarise with the exercise of vulnerability mapping
Learn to effectively communicate and gather advance information for better route planning and response.
Develop the skills required to respond swiftly to trouble spots and report incidents to the police station.
Gain knowledge of the importance of maintaining communication and coordination with other mobile teams like CAPF mobile Lesson Plan:
Welcome and Introduction (10 minutes) o Welcome participants and introduce the session’s objectives.
o Emphasize the crucial role of mobile teams in ensuring the smooth conduct of elections.
Roles and Responsibilities of Mobile Teams (15 minutes) o Discuss their role in Vulnerability Mapping and Identification of Critical Booth along with Revenue sector officials.
o Discuss the various responsibilities of mobile teams, including escorting polling materials and personnel, maintaining security, and gathering advance information.
Role-Play Exercise 1: Route Familiarization and Information Gathering (30 minutes) o Divide participants into small groups. Assign each group a simulated route and scenario.
o Participants must act out the process of familiarising the route and gathering advance information. i). No. of Polling stations ii). Distance between Polling stations and Police stations iii). No of Check posts iv). Code of conduct – Sensitive locations v). VIP movements
Swift Movement and Trouble Spot Concentration (15 minutes) o Discuss the necessity of moving swiftly on the Election Day and concentrating on potential trouble spots.
o Emphasize the importance of proactively addressing issues.
Role-Play Exercise 3: Communication and Coordination (30 minutes) o Provide participants with scenarios that require communication and coordination among mobile teams.
o Participants must demonstrate the use of communication devices and effective coordination.
Escort of Polling Personnel and EVMs (15 minutes) o Highlight the critical role of mobile teams in escorting polling personnel and ensuring the safe return of EVMs after polling.
o Demo on movement of EVMs and officers involved in it.
Mock Scenario Simulation (20 minutes) o Set up a mock scenario simulating a day of election with various challenges.
o Participants must collectively respond to the scenario, applying the skills and knowledge acquired during the training.
Wrap-Up and Conclusion (10 minutes) o Summarise the key takeaways from the training session. o Reinforce the importance of mobile teams in election security.
Evaluation: Participants will be assessed based on their active participation in discussions, their ability to apply knowledge to role-play scenarios, and their effective response to the mock scenario simulation. Role-play exercises and mock scenarios will be evaluated based on participants’ practical performance and adherence to election protocols.
POSTAL BALLOTS/EDC
Postal Balloting by Police Personnel on election duty
A deployment plan shall be charted out for the police officials, well in advance, for issue of EDC if deployed within the constituency where they are registered as elector or issue of postal ballot if posted outside the constituency.
Preparation of Database of voters on election duty: The Superintendent of Police or other competent officer will prepare a database of all police personnel (including home guards, if deployed on election duty) in the district, well in advance. The database should necessarily have the following information and be prepared in coordination with the Returning Officer of the constituency concerned:
No. and name of Assembly Constituency, (ii) Part No. and the Serial Number of the person in electoral roll, (iii) Name and rank of the police official, (iv) EPIC number, (v) Location and address of Facilitation centres for postal balloting, (vi) Information about all the training for which the person is to be called for.
A Nodal Officer shall be appointed to coordinate all activities related to distribution of necessary forms such as Form 12 (for Postal Ballot) or Form 12A (for EDC) to enable the police personnel to make application for EDC or PB, as the case may be. It shall be ensured that the duly filled in applications are signed by the police personnel and sent to the concerned Returning Officer through Nodal Officer/ SP.
Time limit to apply Form 12/12A: The request for issue of EDC shall reach the Returning Officer at least 4 days before the date of poll and that for PB at least 7 days before the date of poll so that EDC or PB, as the case may be, can be issued after making necessary entries in the marked copy of the electoral roll. The Nodal officer shall ensure that these applications in Form 12A/Form 12 and with the electoral roll details are duly entered and signed by the persons concerned so drafted on election duty and the same are sent to the concerned Returning Officer within the specified period.
Issue and collection of Form-12/Form 12A: The Nodal Officer should distribute Form 12/ 12A, to all police personnel drafted for election duty. Duly filled in and signed Form 12/12A, along with a copy of the deployment order as a proof of having been drafted for election duty and photocopy of EPIC in order to ensure that no ineligible person is issued a Postal Ballot should be collected by the Nodal officer and handed over to the Returning Officer. Efforts should be made to collect signed Forms well before the last date of withdrawal of candidature.
However, if for some reason FORM-12/12A of some persons on election duty could not be collected before this date, they should be collected even after this date and as soon as possible.
Setting up of Facilitation Centres for Police Personnel on Election Duty: As per newly inserted Rule 18A, a Voter on Election Duty, shall receive his postal ballot, record his vote thereon and return the same at the facilitation centre as specified, in writing by the Returning Officer. It is, therefore, clarified that all the voters on election duty shall cast their votes at the facilitation centres and not in any other manner.
The Returning Officer will set up a facilitation centre at his office for all the police personnel, videographers, cleaners and other staff engaged in election duty.
The details of Facilitation Centres, shall be fed in the database of the Voters on Election Duty, well in advance so that information about the facilitation centre can be given in the appointment letters issued to Voters on Election Duty.
An officer of the level of Group-B, assisted by three officials shall be responsible for conducting postal balloting at the Facilitation Centre at the office of the RO.
Time and duration of the functioning of the Facilitation Centre: The facilitation centre at the office of the Returning Officer shall function from P-3 to P-1 day during normal office hours. Where deployment of police personnel for election duty is done prior to P-3 day, the Returning Officer may set up facilitation centre at his office accordingly to facilitate postal balloting by the police personnel deployed on election duty.
Availability of Group A/Group B officers for attestation of declaration: In case of Voters on Election Duty, the declaration and signature of the elector in Form 13A is to be attested by a Group A or Group B officer. For this purpose, the Incharge of each of the facilitation centre shall attest the declaration in Form 13A after the voter has marked his choice and put the postal ballot in the inner envelope. The officer shall attest the declaration based on the identification of the voter by his identity documents. He must check before attestation that the Sl. No. of the ballot paper is filled up in the space provided in the declaration, it is signed by the elector in his presence and his address is duly mentioned. The attesting officer should append full signature with date and write in hand or put a stamp showing his designation & office address.
Issue of Postal Ballots and manner of voting at the Facilitation center:
The Incharge of the facilitation centre will be assisted by three officials on the lines of polling officials posted in a polling station, the first official will be incharge of the list of Voters on Election Duty as provided by the Returning Officer and responsible for identification of the voter. He will verify the identity of voters on election duty based on EPIC or any other photo identity document, and obtain signature of each voter in a register.
The second official will be incharge of indelible ink. After identification and signature of the voter in the register, the second official shall apply indelible ink in the left hand’s forefinger of such voter.
The third official will be in-charge of postal ballots, and will issue postal ballot to the Voter on Election Duty.
Casting of postal ballot at facilitation centre: After receiving the postal ballot, the voter shall go into the voting compartment and mark his choice against the name of the candidate in the postal ballot in secrecy. A voter can put a ‘cross’ (X) or ‘tick’(√) against the name of the candidate of his choice. After marking the choice, he will fold the postal ballot paper, put in the inner cover in Form 13B and paste it. Then the voter shall sign the declaration in Form 13A in the presence of and have the signature attested by the Incharge of the Facilitation Centre in Form 13A.
It should be noted that the voter shall write the serial number of the postal ballot paper, if not already filled up, in the space provided for the same in the declaration in Form 13A and on the inner envelope (Form 13B-Cover A) in which the polled postal ballot is kept before the postal ballot is kept inside inner envelope [ Form 13B – Cover A].
Thereafter, the envelope in Form 13B containing the postal ballot and duly attested Form 13A shall be put separately in the outer envelope in Form 13C and sealed by the voter himself. After sealing of the outer envelope [Form 13C], the same will be dropped in the drop box kept at the facilitation centre.
Orientation of Voters on Election Duty on how to cast vote through postal ballot: The Commission directs that the entire procedure for casting of votes through postal ballots shall be explained by the Returning Officers/ Assistant Returning Officers thoroughly to the Voters on Election Duty of all categories, so that there is no error in casting votes by them. The SP, in coordination with the RO/ARO shall organise orientation programme for all police personnel being deployed on election duty.
It should be clarified that all Voters on Election Duty that once a postal ballot has been issued to a voter by the Returning Officer, the voter has no option to vote in any manner other than voting at the facilitation centre. There is no provision for sending the postal ballot by post or through special messenger, if a voter fails to collect his postal ballot and cast his vote at the facilitation centre.
WELFARE MEASURES
Conduct of elections involves diverse activities that are carried out by an election machinery comprising officials and staff from various departments. An efficient and motivated election machinery is an integral part of election planning.
Mobilisation of forces and conducting the election is a daunting task and a major challenge for the police and the district administration. Pro-active intervention by the district police and the district administration through various initiatives to raise the morale of the forces can help reduce the stress level of the Security Forces.
Welfare measure are broadly classified into:
- Welfare measures to be provided by the DG office for the force. (CUG, medical expenses, Ex Gratia etc)
- Welfare measures provided by CP/SP to District force
- Welfare measures provided by DEO to police personnel who are a part of polling party/FS/SST
- Welfare measures to be extended to CAPF Personnel
WELFARE MEASURES TO BE PROVIDED BY DG OFFICE FOR THE FORCE. (CUG, MEDICAL EXPENSES, EX GRATIA ETC)
EX-GRATIA:
In case of any untoward incident of injury or death of polling personnel (including Security Personnel), the Chief Electoral Officer/District Electoral Officer will ensure disposal of such cases of ex-gratia within the stipulated time period under the provisions/instructions laid down in detail by the Commission in the matter.
CEO shall in consultation with State Govt. review the extant norms of ex- gratia compensation adopted/proposed for casualties on election duty.
ii) CUG:
Police deployment during elections leads to movement of manpower. Communication is the major requirement for the smooth operation of elections. In this regard, the DG office in collaboration with the CEO may think of a mechanism for providing dedicated mobile phone number sims to officers deputed on election duty.
iii) MEDICAL EXPENSES:
Medical Aid: Medical Aid should be provided to all police officers deputed on election duty.
Medical Insurance: This may be in the form of extending coverage of various medical insurance schemes to all police officers deputed on election duty. (This should include Home Guards, and Civil/Armed Police Force from other states).
Reimbursement of medical expenses: In case the facilities of medical care in the form of medical treatment from an empanelled hospital is not available then medical reimbursement must be provided for all medical expenses borne during the conduct of election.
An officer in the DGP office should be appointed as a Nodal officer for the same.
Emergency Medical Aid: CEO and State Police Nodal Officer shall ensure availability of Air Ambulances located at strategic positions, based on the local requirements along with well publicised (internally) Standard Operating Procedure for evacuation and cascaded medical facilities.
In this regard, the welfare nodal officer must liaison with local hospitals and emergency medicines prior to the day of poll. The emergency contact numbers of such agencies/hospitals should be available in the election control room/police control room.
CEOs shall also plan or do tie ups for cashless medical treatment facilities, in coordination with State/UT Health Departments, in state-of-the-art hospitals for all such personnel deployed on election duty, including CAPF, and who get injured or fall sick while on duty.
iv) REGULAR SHIFTS AND REST PERIODS:
It may be ensured the clear guidelines for working hours and rest periods are established to prevent officer fatigue, which can compromise their effectiveness.
Establish a rotation system to ensure that police officers are not overworked during election periods. Adequate rest periods should be scheduled to prevent fatigue and burnout.
HONORARIUM AND REMUNERATION
The Sector Police Officer is paid honorarium for election duty. The amount shall be Rs. 7500 for his full-time election duty or on pro rata basis proportional to the duration of duty.
The Flying Squads and SST team are provided a minimum rate of remuneration. Besides, Packed Lunch and/or light refreshment are provided for polling personnel including police personnel, personnel in mobile parties, Home Guards etc. deployed at all polling stations/counting centres for election related work. Persons deployed for election related duties are paid TA/DA.
vi) RECOGNITION AND APPRECIATION:
Acknowledge and appreciate the efforts of police officers through public recognition, awards, or ceremonies. Institutional mechanisms should be initiated for recognition of good work done in elections by the police department and its sister organisations like the home guard and CAPF.
vii FEEDBACK MECHANISM:
A mechanism must be established in which the feedback of the police men and other agencies are taken so that improvement may be done in the future.
WELFARE MEASURES PROVIDED BY CP/SP TO DISTRICT FORCE NODAL OFFICER AT DISTRICT LEVEL:
A Senior Officer shall be nominated by the SP to coordinate and supervise all the welfare measures related to polling personnel. ii) A Senior Officer shall be nominated by the DEO to coordinate and supervise all the welfare measures related to polling personnel.
iii) There is a need for coordination between both nodal officers.
iv) On similar lines, RO shall nominate a Nodal Officer for the said purpose. SDPO should nominate one officer not below the rank of an ASI to coordinate with the nodal officer of the constituency to ensure that welfare measures are undertaken for police officers, men and other armed forces deployed on election duty.
All the details of Nodal Officer nominated shall be mentioned in DEMP (District Election Management Plan) and Police Force Deployment and Welfare Plan and contact number shall be shared with polling personnel drafted for election related duties. These details shall also be displayed at Training/Dispatch/Receiving Centres.
vi) There should also be a separate head for welfare measures extended to private and auxiliary persons associated with police force in election processes like driver and staff of vehicles associated with election, volunteers like NSS, NCC cadets, runners in shadow areas and others. All the welfare measures like payment of remunerations, compensation and others should also be extended to them . vii) ARRANGEMENTS FOR ACCOMMODATION:
During the conduct of elections there are sometimes requirements of movement of force/transfer of police officers. Ordinarily this is done only during the conduct of the election. To meet this temporary challenge for accommodation/ food/ and other logistics for the police men it is necessary that SP/ CP should create certain infrastructure like a temporary guest house/barrack for providing accommodation to the police men.
Care should be taken that basic amenities like electricity/ water facilities/ toilet facilities/ ventilation should be adequate in all these places of stay. viii) ARRANGEMENT FOR TRANSPORT:
Sufficient numbers of vehicles should be hired to transport police teams. Efforts should be made to facilitate the transport by liasoning with state transport corporations to provide sufficient buses or efforts should be made to hire private vehicles.
Movement of forces from one location to other has to be meticulously planned, it will save a long and tiring journey and will have less fatigued force.
ix) ARRANGEMENTS FOR FOOD:
Sufficient funds should be deployed for arranging food for the policemen for duty. policemen are deployed for various duties like election rallies, nomination process etc. it should be an endeavour of the SP/CP to provide adequate food/water/ resting facilities to all staff that has been deployed.
ARRANGEMENTS AT CENTRES FOR BRIEFING/DEBRIEFING:
SP/CP should ensure that whenever police officers are being deployed for any law & Order bandobust there should be a proper briefing and debriefing sessions. The SP/CP should ensure that this is conducted in a place with all necessary arrangements such as Drinking Water, Washrooms, Help Desk on Arrival for Reporting, Vehicle Parking, Public Announcement, Arrangements for Food, Layout Map with Directions, Signage Boards, Facilities for seating and rest.
WELFARE MEASURES PROVIDED BY DEO TO POLICE PERSONNEL WHO ARE A PART OF POLLING PARTY/FS/SST
All the information regarding training programme, Dispatch and Receiving Centre arrangements etc. should be conveyed to the polling personnel on time and in proper manner.
EMERGENCY HELPLINE NUMBER:
A dedicated Helpline number be provided to the Sector Officer and all the polling personnel. This must be communicated to all policemen on duty as well as monitored by the police control rooms also.
ii) HEALTH FACILITIES:
Separate arrangements for health care/ first aid assistance to polling personnel at Training/ Dispatch/ Receiving Centres should be made along with deployment of ambulance with medical/ para-medical staff in case of requirement.
Polling staff and police officers once deployed to police stations should be connected with local ambulance network (108) so that in case of any health- related emergency their services can be sought.
Enhancement of medical facilities in the areas with deployment of more Doctors from other parts of the state should also be ensured. Essential medicines to be kept in sufficient quantity at centralized holding area so that requisite dose is administered to everyone under supervision of the medical officer of local unit.
iii) FACILITIES AT TRAINING CENTRE:
Proper arrangements of basic amenities such as Drinking Water, Washrooms, Help Desk on Arrival for Reporting, Vehicle Parking, Public Announcement, Arrangements for Food, Layout Map with Directions, Signage Boards, Facilities for seating and rest, must be made at training centres.
Nodal Officer(s) appointed shall remain present physically at all these locations and Senior Officers shall closely monitor the facilities.
iv) ARRANGEMENTS AT DISPATCH/ RECEIVING CENTRE:
Appropriate arrangements on basic amenities which include Drinking Water, Washrooms, Vehicle Parking, Food/
Refreshments etc. shall be made at the Dispatch / Receiving Centre. Nodal Officer(s) shall be appointed at respective centres who shall physically monitor the facilities under the supervision of the seniors.
Under no circumstances, polling personnel shall go out of these Centres on the pretext of fetching for food/water or to use washrooms etc. carrying election materials.
HELP DESK:
Help desk shall be arranged at the entrance of the Dispatch/ Receiving Centre. These Help Desks shall be well equipped with manpower and other facilities for marking the attendance of polling staff, guiding them to know their polling station and polling team, issuing of appointment orders as per third randomization and providing any other assistance, if required.
The help desk should be equipped with the District Police Deployment plan and must also be in a position to guide the police staff.
vi) LAYOUT MAP WITH DIRECTIONS:
Proper layout shall be made for the Dispatch/Receiving centre prominently indicating location of Help desk, Learning desk, Sector wise counters, refreshment area, washrooms, vehicle parking and flow of movement.
vii) SIGNAGE BOARDS:
Signage Boards with clear marking shall be placed at the entrance and inside the centre at different points to show the directions clearly.
viii) PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM:
A functional public address system with good loudspeakers shall be arranged near RO Table to give necessary instructions from time to time to the polling staff. The audio of the public address system should reach the last point of the venue.
ix) BRIEFING:
Election material shall be essentially delivered to polling parties in consolidated modular or packaged form. Police officers on duty and attached to the poll party must be briefed about the role and responsibility of each polling party members. They should also be made aware of the safety precautions that need to be taken in relation to the safety of the EVMs.
SYSTEMATIC ARRANGEMENT OF DESK:
Counters for dispatch and receiving election material shall be arranged preferably Sector wise. Each Sector counter should
have table and seating arrangements polling station wise for all the polling staff at one place with adequate spacing. The polling station numbers should be displayed prominently on each table.
xi) FACILITIES AT INTERMEDIATE STRONG ROOM FACILITIES:
Neat and functional basic amenities such as clean drinking water, refreshments, washroom, power connection etc. may also be made at Intermediate EVM Strong Rooms, if applicable, for the polling team as well as Sector Officers before poll and after poll.
xii) TRANSPORT FACILITY:
Arrangements for transport shall be supervised by a Senior Officer and the return movement of polling personnel from polling stations shall be tracked closely and a confirmatory report shall be obtained through Sector Officer on safe arrival of polling personnel at polling station.
It shall be ensured that polling parties ride the designated vehicles only and the vehicles follow the pre declared route.
Special care should be taken for Women and PWD Staff so that they have no difficulty in conveyance from one place to another.
xiii) FACILITIES AT POLLING STATION:
Extant conditions of all the polling stations shall be physically verified by the DEO and RO through field officials so that conditions can be improved significantly and all the necessary amenities prescribed under AMF framework such as tables, chairs, benches, drinking water/ separate washrooms, power connection and plug points for charging etc. and shade etc. can be ensured.
xiv ACCOMODATION FOR POLLING PARTIES:
Proper arrangements should be made for the stay of polling staff and police staff wherever required. Polling stations with enough space or adjoining rooms shall be identified during physical verification for the said purpose.
This should include accommodation for Police Staff/Home Guards/ Armed Police Force/ CAPFs.
xv) FOOD ARRANGEMENTS:
Food arrangements must be done for the polling parties and also packed food be prepared for all the other parties like FST, Police sector Mobiles etc . This may be done in coordination with the District SP.
In case of difficulty in providing food to polling personnel and police staff, proper alternative arrangements should be made by DEO depending on local conditions.
In this regard, cooperation of local Self-Help Groups can be considered. The farthest polling parties (P-3) can also be provided with dry ration as a temporary arrangement.
Special care should be taken for provisioning of food for CAPF on deployment. Adequate vehicles may be kept reserve for providing food packets to CAPFs deployed in polling stations.
WELFARE MEASURES TO BE EXTENDED TO CAPF COYS :
It is to be ensured that facilities like, Accommodation, Logistic, Compensation, Packed lunch or payment for refreshment charges etc are provided .
Coordination: All the departments of the state government at the district level should be instructed to facilitate the forces from their side for the smooth conduct of elections. To facilitate the CAPF welfare every District must appoint a District level Nodal Officer for Welfare, not below the rank of Deputy SP; and his contact details must be circulated to all members of the state and central police forces who are deployed for polls.
General direction on welfare measures to CAPF as contained in chapter 9 (para-9.8) shall also extended to police and any other forces
